README.rst, before:

Welcome to Open Dylan!
======================

Open Dylan is a compiler and a set of libraries for the Dylan
programming language.  If you're interested in working on the compiler
and core libraries then you've come to the right place.  If you want
to write your own Dylan libraries and *use* the compiler then you
should `download a binary release <http://opendylan.org/download/>`_
and then read the `Getting Started
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/getting-started/>`_ guide.

Open Dylan has two back-ends, HARP (which translates to native x86
code) and a C back-end.

The HARP back-end uses the Memory Pool System (MPS) from Ravenbrook,
Limited to do its memory management.  The MPS is available from
Ravenbrook at http://www.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/ and must be
downloaded and built separately.

The C back-end uses Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative C/C++ garbage
collector, available at https://github.com/ivmai/bdwgc

Open Dylan is written in Dylan, thus a Dylan compiler is needed to
bootstrap it. Binary releases are available from
http://opendylan.org/download/

Once installed, the following command-line will produce a binary in
~/Open-Dylan/bin/hello-world
::

  dylan-compiler -build hello-world


Compilation of the compiler itself
==================================

Clone the git repository::

  git clone git://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan.git --recursive


Compilation on UNIX
===================

Please note that on 64 bit Linux we need a big stack, the default
stack is too small, please increase with ulimit -s before (safe is
to double its value)

* Get MPS or boehm-gc, depending on your platform:
* Linux x86 or FreeBSD x86 (HARP) -> MPS
* Mac OS X and all 64 bit (C) -> boehm-gc
* Get XML::Parser

::

  ./autogen.sh
  ./configure \
     --with-mps=/path/to/mps-kit \  # if using the HARP back-end
     --with-gc=/path/to/gc \ # if using the C back-end
     --prefix=/opt/opendylan-current
  make
  sudo make install

The first generation will be in Bootstrap.2/bin/dylan-compiler ,
and a second generation will be in /opt/opendylan-current/bin/dylan-compiler


Compilation on Windows
=======================

* Get MPS

* Make sure to have required tools installed: namely Debugging tools for
  Windows, a C compiler (PellesC or VC6) and Microsoft Platform SDK.

* Open a shell (windows command processor), there set the environment
  variable SDK4MEMORY_POOL_SYSTEM to <where you unpacked MPS>.

* Please keep in mind that paths with whitespaces are not well supported.

* Go to admin\\builds and do a::

  build-release.bat <target-dir> /sources <git-checkout>\sources /internal

This will do a 4-stage bootstrap, in the end there will be a
complete IDE in <target-dir>.

* Building an installer:

* Get NSIS from http://nsis.sf.net and the HTML help workshop (from
  Microsoft, to generate the chm).

* Go to packages\\win32-nsis, read Build.txt and follow the
  instructions. Make sure you are using the same command shell as used
  for building Open Dylan (to retain environment variables).


Building the MPS
================

This is not required anymore since it is part of building the runtime.

Go to the 'code' subdirectory in the MPS sources and build the mmdw
target:

Windows::

   nmake /k /f w3i3mv.nmk mmdw.lib

Linux::

  make -f lii4gc.gmk mmdw.a mpsplan.a

  The actual makefile you use may differ depending on your platform.
  See the readme.txt file in the MPS distribution for a list.

  glibc >=2.3 and linux kernel >= 2.6 required

  For MPS 1.106.2 I (cgay) encountered this problem on Ubuntu 7.10:
  http://www.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/issue/job001637/ The solution
  was to replace

     #define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 1

  with

    #define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500

  in both prmcli.h and pthrdext.c.  The comments in the above URL
  weren't explicit about that.

  For MPS 1.108.0 I (cgay) encountered this problem on Ubuntu 11.04:

    cc1: warnings being treated as errors
    protlii3.c: In function ‘sigHandle’:
    protlii3.c:115:3: error: case label is not an integer constant expression
    protlii3.c:116:3: error: case label is not an integer constant expression
    make[2]: *** [lii4gc/hi/protlii3.o] Error 1
    make[1]: *** [target] Error 2
    make: *** [mmdw.a] Error 2

  To work around it edit gc.gmk to remove -Werror from CFLAGSCOMPILER.

The main point to notice here is that you don't just build the default
target, as described in the MPS documentation.  You must build
mmdw.lib or mmdw.a instead.

The above instructions use the ci, "cool internal" variant of the MPS
on Windows. On Linux, MPS_VARIANT=hi is specified in
opendylan/sources/lib/run-time/pentium-linux/Makefile.in.  The ci variant
does quite a lot of sanity checks all over, which heavily impacts
performance, up to a factor of three in total application runtime.  If
you're looking for performance figures, use the hi, "hot internal", or
even wi, "white-hot internal" releases.

Commit message:

Note about clearing pre-existing install before reinstalling.

README.rst, after:

Welcome to Open Dylan!
======================

Open Dylan is a compiler and a set of libraries for the Dylan
programming language.  If you're interested in working on the compiler
and core libraries then you've come to the right place.  If you want
to write your own Dylan libraries and *use* the compiler then you
should `download a binary release <http://opendylan.org/download/>`_
and then read the `Getting Started
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/getting-started/>`_ guide.

Open Dylan has two back-ends, HARP (which translates to native x86
code) and a C back-end.

The HARP back-end uses the Memory Pool System (MPS) from Ravenbrook,
Limited to do its memory management.  The MPS is available from
Ravenbrook at http://www.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/ and must be
downloaded and built separately.

The C back-end uses Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative C/C++ garbage
collector, available at https://github.com/ivmai/bdwgc

Open Dylan is written in Dylan, thus a Dylan compiler is needed to
bootstrap it. Binary releases are available from
http://opendylan.org/download/

Once installed, the following command-line will produce a binary in
~/Open-Dylan/bin/hello-world
::

  dylan-compiler -build hello-world


Compilation of the compiler itself
==================================

Clone the git repository::

  git clone git://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan.git --recursive


Compilation on UNIX
===================

Please note that on 64 bit Linux we need a big stack, the default
stack is too small, please increase with ulimit -s before (safe is
to double its value)

* Get MPS or boehm-gc, depending on your platform:
* Linux x86 or FreeBSD x86 (HARP) -> MPS
* Mac OS X and all 64 bit (C) -> boehm-gc
* Get XML::Parser

::

  ./autogen.sh
  ./configure \
     --with-mps=/path/to/mps-kit \  # if using the HARP back-end
     --with-gc=/path/to/gc \ # if using the C back-end
     --prefix=/opt/opendylan-current
  make
  sudo make install

The first generation will be in Bootstrap.2/bin/dylan-compiler ,
and a second generation will be in /opt/opendylan-current/bin/dylan-compiler

Make sure that the target installation directory has been deleted. If you try
to install into a directory that already has an older version of Open Dylan in
it, the build will fail.

Compilation on Windows
=======================

* Get MPS

* Make sure to have required tools installed: namely Debugging tools for
  Windows, a C compiler (PellesC or VC6) and Microsoft Platform SDK.

* Open a shell (windows command processor), there set the environment
  variable SDK4MEMORY_POOL_SYSTEM to <where you unpacked MPS>.

* Please keep in mind that paths with whitespaces are not well supported.

* Go to admin\\builds and do a::

  build-release.bat <target-dir> /sources <git-checkout>\sources /internal

This will do a 4-stage bootstrap, in the end there will be a
complete IDE in <target-dir>.

* Building an installer:

* Get NSIS from http://nsis.sf.net and the HTML help workshop (from
  Microsoft, to generate the chm).

* Go to packages\\win32-nsis, read Build.txt and follow the
  instructions. Make sure you are using the same command shell as used
  for building Open Dylan (to retain environment variables).


Building the MPS
================

This is not required anymore since it is part of building the runtime.

Go to the 'code' subdirectory in the MPS sources and build the mmdw
target:

Windows::

   nmake /k /f w3i3mv.nmk mmdw.lib

Linux::

  make -f lii4gc.gmk mmdw.a mpsplan.a

  The actual makefile you use may differ depending on your platform.
  See the readme.txt file in the MPS distribution for a list.

  glibc >=2.3 and linux kernel >= 2.6 required

  For MPS 1.106.2 I (cgay) encountered this problem on Ubuntu 7.10:
  http://www.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/issue/job001637/ The solution
  was to replace

     #define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 1

  with

    #define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500

  in both prmcli.h and pthrdext.c.  The comments in the above URL
  weren't explicit about that.

  For MPS 1.108.0 I (cgay) encountered this problem on Ubuntu 11.04:

    cc1: warnings being treated as errors
    protlii3.c: In function ‘sigHandle’:
    protlii3.c:115:3: error: case label is not an integer constant expression
    protlii3.c:116:3: error: case label is not an integer constant expression
    make[2]: *** [lii4gc/hi/protlii3.o] Error 1
    make[1]: *** [target] Error 2
    make: *** [mmdw.a] Error 2

  To work around it edit gc.gmk to remove -Werror from CFLAGSCOMPILER.

The main point to notice here is that you don't just build the default
target, as described in the MPS documentation.  You must build
mmdw.lib or mmdw.a instead.

The above instructions use the ci, "cool internal" variant of the MPS
on Windows. On Linux, MPS_VARIANT=hi is specified in
opendylan/sources/lib/run-time/pentium-linux/Makefile.in.  The ci variant
does quite a lot of sanity checks all over, which heavily impacts
performance, up to a factor of three in total application runtime.  If
you're looking for performance figures, use the hi, "hot internal", or
even wi, "white-hot internal" releases.
