*****************
Open Dylan 2019.1
*****************

This document describes the 2019.1 release of Open Dylan, released 31
March, 2019.  This release contains many enhancements and bug fixes, highlights
of which are listed below.  For complete details see `the commit logs
<https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/compare/v2014.1...v2019.1.0>`_.

* Download the release: https://opendylan.org/download
* Read documentation: https://opendylan.org
* Report problems: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues


LLVM
====

The LLVM back-end, which uses LLVM 7.x or later for code generation,
is now full-featured and mature on i386 and x86_64 Linux, FreeBSD, and
macOS platforms. Features of the LLVM back-end include:

* Full source-level debug information

* Zero-cost nonlocal exit support

* Arithmetic exception handling

Note that LLVM is not yet the default back end so for now you must add
``-back-end llvm`` to the command line when building if you want LLVM.  We
expect to make it the default in an upcoming release.

Note also that the binary releases do not assume that you have a
sufficiently new release of the LLVM Clang compiler, and are
configured to use the platform default C compiler instead. If you have
installed Clang 7.0 or later, you can edit
``share/opendylan/build-scripts/config.jam`` and set the CC variable
to point to your Clang executable:

.. code-block:: 

   CC                ?= clang-7 ;
   CCFLAGS           ?= -w -g -O2 ;
   C++               ?= clang++-7 ;
   C++FLAGS          ?= $(CCFLAGS) ;

Compiler
========

* The compiler emits warnings for issues with ``define sealed domain``:

  * Incorrect number of type specializers provided. The number of type
    specializers must match the number of required parameters for the
    generic function.
  * Type specializers are not subtypes of the corresponding required
    argument of the generic function.

    For example, this is useful for catching an incorrect sealing of
    ``make``:

    .. code-block:: dylan

       define sealed domain make (<my-class>); // Wrong
       define sealed domain make (singleton(<my-class>)); // Correct

  * Previously, ``define domain`` was accepted without warning. This is
    not valid Dylan syntax as it should be ``define sealed domain``.

* Dylan functions that are marked as ``not-inline`` now take that into
  account when generating code in the LLVM and C back-ends.

* The C back-end no longer generates invalid C when outputting a
  float with a value of infinity or NaN.

* Some bugs that didn't permit valid floating point literals to be
  used have been fixed. These are typically edge cases like ``+.5``
  or ``-3d3`` rather than commonly used literal notations.

* The C back-end correctly handles indirect C-functions (where a
  function pointer is given to be invoked rather than a direct
  function call).

* Warnings and errors are now colorized when printing on supporting
  output devices.

* The compiler progress messages are now less verbose unless the
  ``-verbose`` command-line option is supplied.

* Warnings that refer to primitive and C functions are now clearer.

* A bug in the C back-end that broke required return values combined
  with type-checked ``#rest`` return values has been fixed.

* An erroneous validity check for the ``Base-Address:`` keyword in LID
  or HDP project files on Windows has been fixed.

* The HARP back-end can now handle raw FFI calls that return
  ``<raw-single-float>`` or ``<raw-double-float>`` values.

* The compiler command line, as well as the interactive ``build`` and
  ``link`` commands, accept a ``-jobs`` option to control the number
  of concurrent external build processes during the link
  stage. Setting this to the number of available CPU cores can provide
  speedups for large builds.

* The experimental ``#name:foo`` `syntax`_ has been changed to ``#:name:foo``.
  Requiring the initial colon will prevent conflicts with new hash literal
  syntax that may be added in the future. Several additional delimiter
  characters may now be used: ```...```, ``'...'``, ``|...|``

.. _syntax: https://opendylan.org/library-reference/language-extensions/parser-expansions.html

Run-time
========

* Support for printing a backtrace (with demangled Dylan function names)
  when an unhandled error condition is signaled has been implemented.
  Note that this requires the use of the optional ``libunwind`` library.

* Support for handling "invalid" floating point exceptions has been
  added. These are generated when taking the square root of a negative
  number and other similar situations where the numerical domain
  is invalid.

  When an invalid floating point exception occurs,
  ``<arithmetic-domain-error>`` will be signaled (much like the other
  ``<arithmetic-error>`` situations).

* Limited integer instance checks have been optimized. This will have
  the most impact when using the LLVM compiler backend.

* In the C runtime, ``primitive_sleep`` now functions correctly.

* Two new primitives, ``primitive-read-cycle-counter`` and
  ``primitive-read-return-address``, have been added. These are useful
  for writing profiling and event logging tools.

Debugging
=========

* There is a new ``dylan-lldb`` wrapper script which can be used to
  launch ``lldb`` and pre-load the Open Dylan LLDB integration scripts.
  ``lldb`` is the debugger that is part of the LLVM project. It is the
  default debugger on macOS.

  If you need it to launch a custom build of LLDB, you can set the
  ``OPEN_DYLAN_LLDB`` environment variable to point to an alternative
  ``lldb`` executable.

Documentation
=============

* The documentation generator included within the compiler has been
  updated to produce better and more accurate documentation that will
  require less manual editing. To use it, after compiling your library,
  use this command::

    export -format rst -file my-lib.rst interface-reference

Build System
============

* The arguments to configure for specifying which garbage collector to
  use have changed. The arguments are now::

    --with-mps=DIR
    --with-gc=DIR
    --with-harp-collector=mps|boehm|malloc
    --with-c-collector=boehm|malloc
    --with-llvm-collector=boehm|malloc

  The ``--with-mps`` option (for pointing to the Memory Pool System
  source directory) is only needed when using the MPS collector with
  the HARP back-end on either 32-bit x86 FreeBSD or 32-bit x86 Linux.

  The system should be able to find the Boehm-Demers-Weiser collector
  automatically if it is in the standard system install directory; the
  ``--with-gc`` option should only be needed if it is installed in a
  non-standard location.

  The default collectors are MPS for the HARP back-end's run-time
  library, and the Boehm-Demers-Weiser collector for the C and LLVM
  back-ends. These shouldn't be changed unless you're sure you know
  what you're doing.

* A new option for building C++ code, ``c++-source-files``,  has been
  added to LID files.  This matches the ``c-source-files:`` keyword.

* A failure to find shared libraries on Ubuntu 17 & 18 was fixed. See
  GitHub issues `1064
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1064>`_ and `1197
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1197>`_.

Library Changes
===============

dylan Library
-------------

* Symbol comparisons when using ``\=`` are now the same as using ``\==``
  rather than being significantly more expensive. See `issue #899`_.

* The function dispatch implementation now makes a proper distinction
  between ``<single-method-engine-node>`` and ``<keyword-method>`` with the
  help of a new ``primitive-callable-as-engine-node?`` compiler primitive.

* Integer and floating point literal syntax is changed to allow underscore
  between any two successive digits, for readability.  See
  `DEP-0011 <https://opendylan.org/proposals/dep-0011-numeric-literal-syntax.html>`_
  for details.

common-dylan Library
--------------------

* The ``transcendentals`` module now has a ``sincos`` generic function.

* The ``transcendentals`` module now has a ``hypot`` generic function.

* The ``transcendentals`` module now has an ``ilog2`` function that returns
  the integer value of the logarithm of a value in base 2.

* The transcendental and hyperbolic functions are no longer sealing their
  domains on ``<real>`` parameters.

* Again in the ``transcendentals`` module, many methods have been removed
  that converted from ``<real>`` to ``<float>``. Callers should pass in
  values of the appropriate type and precision instead. This impacts:

  * ``^``, ``exp``, ``log``
  * ``sqrt``
  * ``sin``, ``cos``, ``tan``
  * ``asin``, ``acos``, ``atan``
  * ``sinh``, ``cosh``, ``tanh``
  * ``asinh``, ``acosh``, ``atanh``

* The ``common-extensions`` module now provides a ``classify-float`` method
  which determines whether the given float is ``#"normal"``, ``#"zero"``,
  ``#"infinite"``, ``#"nan"``, or ``#"subnormal"``.

* The ``byte-vector`` module now provides ``hexstring`` and ``from-hexstring``
  methods for fast conversion between ``<byte-vector>`` and hexadecimal
  strings.

* The ``thread`` module has gained a ``current-thread-id`` function. The
  ``thread-id`` is also available for any ``<thread>`` object.

* The ``simple-profiling`` module now exports ``start-profiling`` and
  ``stop-profiling`` rather than requiring that users directly invoke
  ``start-profiling-type`` and ``stop-profiling-type`` multiple times.

* The ``machine-words`` module now knows how to count the bits set
  in a machine word via ``%count-ones``. This is also available as
  a new compiler primitive, ``primitive-machine-word-count-ones``.

* Mismatches in the use of internal-use raw types have been resolved.

io Library
----------

* An implementation of indenting streams for handling indented text
  output has been added. See ``<indented-stream>``, ``indent``, and
  ``with-indentation`` in the ``streams`` module.

* Some generic functions that apply to ``<buffered-stream>`` have had
  their signatures tightened.

* Mismatches in the use of internal-use raw types have been resolved.

system Library
--------------

* A new ``machine-concurrent-thread-count`` function, which returns
  the number of active CPU cores or execution threads, has been added
  to the ``operating-system`` module.

* New specializations on :drm:`as` have been added for creating locators
  from strings for the ``<file-system-directory-locator>`` and
  ``<file-system-file-locator>`` classes. These aren't typically used but
  their omission led to possible confusion for users.

.. _issue #899: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/899
.. _documented in the library reference: https://opendylan.org/library-reference/coloring-stream/

* A problem with constructing ``<date>`` objects for ``time_t`` values
  with more than 30 bits (i.e., any time after Sat Jan 10 13:37:04 UTC 2004)
  has been fixed.

* Mismatches in the use of internal-use raw types have been resolved.

c-ffi Library
-------------

* Nested C structs by value are now supported by the C backend. Previously,
  using this construct would result in a compilation error in the generated
  C code.

* Using ``%call-c-function`` or ``%objc-msgsend`` with a void result type
  no longer requires specifying a result type of ``<raw-c-void>``. Simply
  putting an empty value list is sufficient:

  .. code-block:: dylan

     %call-c-function ("SetLastError", c-modifiers: "__stdcall")
         (dwErrorCode :: <raw-c-unsigned-long>) => ()
       (integer-as-raw(0))
     end;

  Previously, this required specifying the result type explicitly:

  .. code-block:: dylan

     %call-c-function ("SetLastError", c-modifiers: "__stdcall")
         (dwErrorCode :: <raw-c-unsigned-long>) => (nothing :: <raw-c-void>)
       (integer-as-raw(0))
     end;

testworks Library
-----------------

* It is no longer necessary to use suites. By default ``run-test-application``
  runs all defined tests.
* Test results are now colorized when the output stream supports it.
  Green for success, red for failure, etc.
* Test summaries are more concise and easier to read.
* Added support for expected failures.
* New assertion macros ``assert-instance?`` and ``assert-not-instance?``.
* Many other minor improvements including to the documentation.

collections Library
-------------------

* The ``bit-count`` operation from ``bit-vector`` (also used by ``<bit-set>``)
  has been changed to use the new ``primitive-machine-word-count-ones`` that
  has been added in this release.

coloring-stream Library
-----------------------

* A new library for doing colored text output has been added. It currently
  supports ANSI codes on Unix terminals. It has been
  :doc:`documented in the library reference </library-reference/coloring-stream/index>`.

variable-search Library
-----------------------

* A bug that caused intermittent crashes on FreeBSD has been fixed.


Contributors
============

We'd like to thank all the people that made contributions to this release and
to surrounding libraries in the Dylan ecosystem. This list is probably
incomplete...

* Bruce Mitchener
* Peter S. Housel
* Carl Gay
* Peter Hull
* Fernando Raya
* Alfredo Beaumont
* Wim Vander Schelden
* Kamil Rytarowski
* Ingo Albrecht
* Dan Midwood

