*****************
Open Dylan 2023.1
*****************

This document describes the 2023.1 release of Open Dylan, released 01
June, 2023.  The highlights of the release are listed below.  For complete
details see the `commit logs
<https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/compare/v2022.1.0...v2023.1.0>`_ for
this release.

.. note:: Some commit logs, for example for testworks and other libraries that
          are included in Open Dylan as git submodules, may be in other
          repositories.

* Download the release: https://opendylan.org/download
* Read documentation: https://opendylan.org
* Report problems: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues


Compiler
========

* The "batteries included" installation includes `LLVM version 16.0.5
  <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/tag/llvmorg-16.0.5>`_ and `BDW
  GC version 8.2.4 <https://github.com/ivmai/bdwgc/releases/tag/v8.2.4>`_.

* `Dylan Enhancement Proposal (DEP) 12
  <https://opendylan.org/proposals/dep-0012-string-literals.html>`_ was
  implemented, adding multi-line and "raw" string literals.

* `Improvements to LLVM bitcode generation <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/pull/1469>`_

* A bug in `parser expansions
  <https://opendylan.org/library-reference/language-extensions/parser-expansions.html>`_
  that could crash the compiler if the end delimiter was missing has been fixed.

* `Bug 1490 <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1490>`_, which
  could result in spurious warnings from the compiler `has been fixed
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/pull/1492>`_.


Tooling
=======

* The `dylan <https://github.com/dylan-lang/dylan-tool>`_ command-line tool has
  had `various improvements
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/dylan-tool/compare/730b5c99627ac653636ddaf01187a213d7d23aa8...f6edf2ef5f5c04f295a075ae70eb8462580be4ef>`_,
  including:

  * Simplified workspace model
  * Simplified process to publish packages
  * Packages installed locally in workspace directory by default
  * Global package installation follows the `XDG Base Directory Specification
    <https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html>`_.
  * Symlink points to current installed version of packages, for easier tooling.

  Full documentation is
  `here <https://package.opendylan.org/deft/>`_.

* The :program:`make-dylan-app` program has been removed and is replaced by
  :command:`dylan new application` and :command:`dylan new library`.


Library Updates
===============

Submodules
----------

Open Dylan uses Git submodules to pull in some dependencies and user programs
may depend on these for now. The notable changes in those submodules are listed
below:

* **sphinx-extensions** - Improvements to DRM references.

* **dylan-tool** - See above.

* **collection-extensions** - The ``split-at`` function has been removed. Use
  :gf:`split` instead. Documentation improvements.

* **command-line-parser** - Minor bug fix to add a missing newline when no
  subcommand is provided.

* **json** - Fixed ``sort-keys?`` option for recursive :gf:`print-json` calls.


system Library
--------------

* A `bug <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1470>`_ in
  :func:`locator-directory` for relative directory locators was fixed.

* The :func:`run-application` function is now fully documented.

* A ``follow-links?:`` keyword argument has been added to the
  :func:`file-exists?` function. The default is true, for compatibility with the
  previous behavior.


Contributors
============

We'd like to thank all the people who made contributions to this release and to
surrounding libraries in the Dylan ecosystem. This list is probably
incomplete...

* Fernando Raya
* Peter S. Housel
* Bruce Mitchener
* Carl Gay
