*****************
Open Dylan 2026.2
*****************

This document describes the 2026.2 release of Open Dylan, released <month>, 2026.  The
highlights of the release are listed below.  For complete details see the `commit logs
<https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/compare/v2026.1.0...v2026.2.0>`_ for this
release.

.. note:: Some commit logs, for example for testworks and other libraries that
          are included in Open Dylan as git submodules, may be in other
          repositories.

* Download the release: https://opendylan.org/download
* Read documentation: https://opendylan.org
* Report problems: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues


Compiler
========

TODO

Tools
=====

TODO

Bundled Library Updates
=======================

Changes to libraries that are part of the `opendylan repository
<https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan>`_.

System
------

* :gf:`resolve-file` (in the ``file-system`` module) replaces :const:`resolve-locator`
  (in the ``locators`` module) because it is fundamentally a file-system operation.

  :gf:`resolve-file` now returns the correct class of locator, a subclass of
  :class:`<file-locator>` or class:`<directory-locator>`, depending on the actual file
  type of the fully resolved file.  It previously returned an instance of the same
  class as the locator it was provided, but that is not always accurate when symbolic
  links are followed.

* :gf:`directory-contents` has a new keyword argument ``resolve-links?``.  If true,
  symbolic links are resolved as with :gf:`resolve-file`.

* :gf:`expand-pathname` is no longer called by other ``file-system`` functions.  If you
  depended on this behavior, call :gf:`expand-pathname` directly.

  On Unix, ``~`` or ``~user`` are expanded to the specified user's home directory.  The
  exact string "~" is now correctly expanded.  :gf:`expand-pathname` now uses the thread
  safe function ``getpwnam_r`` on Unix systems.

  On Windows, 8.3 short file names are expanded.

* `Issue 1408 <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1408>`_, which could result
  in an infinite loop in :gf:`link-target`, has been fixed.  In addition, the
  :gf:`link-target` function accepts a new keyword argument, ``follow-links?``, which
  specifies whether to follow all links until a non-symlink file is found (the default)
  or just return the direct target of the given symlink.

Submoduled Library Updates
==========================

The following changes were made to Open Dylan dependencies that are included as Git
submodules.

TODO

Contributors
============

We'd like to thank all the people that made contributions to this release and
to surrounding libraries in the Dylan ecosystem....

TODO
