documentation/website/source/documentation/index.rst, before:

*************
Documentation
*************

.. warning:: We are in the process of converting over to a new documentation
   publishing system. Some documents are not entirely correct yet. We've
   retained links to the 'Old HTML' where relevant. These will be going away
   in the near future.
   :class: alert-message warning

.. raw:: html

   <div class="row">
     <div class="span8">

     <h2>Learning Dylan</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message success">
       <p>Just getting started with Open Dylan?  We recommend that
       you read the <a href="intro-dylan/">Introduction to Dylan</a>
       to get a feel for the language. After that, you can broaden
       your knowledge with the <a href="../books/dpg/">Dylan Programming</a>
       book.</p>
     </div>

`An Introduction to Dylan <intro-dylan/index.html>`_
[`pdf <intro-dylan/IntroductiontoDylan.pdf>`__]

    This tutorial is written primarily for those with solid programming
    experience in C++ or another object-oriented static language. It
    provides a gentler introduction to Dylan than does the DRM.

`Dylan Programming <http://opendylan.org/books/dpg/>`_

    A good, book length Dylan tutorial by several Harlequin employees.

`Getting Started with Open Dylan <getting-started/index.html>`_
[`pdf <getting-started/GettingStartedWithOpenDylan.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/env/index.htm>`__]

    Describes Open Dylan's interactive development environment.

`Building Applications Using DUIM <building-with-duim/index.html>`_
[`pdf <building-with-duim/BuildingApplicationsWithDUIM.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/dguide/index.htm>`__]

    Describes how to use DUIM (Dylan User Interface Manager),
    the portable window programming toolkit.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Cheat Sheets</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>Quick one-page sheets for common tasks.</p>
     </div>

`Dylan Cheat Sheet <cheatsheet.html>`_

    A cheat sheet to get you started with the basics of Dylan syntax.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Articles</h2>

    <div class="alert-message block-message info">
      <p>Featured articles and blog postings.</p>
    </div>

    <h3>Learning Dylan</h3>

`Procedural Dylan <../articles/procedural-dylan/index.html>`_ by Paul Haahr.

    This essay explores Dylan from the perspective of a programmer used to
    traditional procedural languages, such as Pascal or C.

.. raw:: html

    <h3>Tools</h3>

`Development inside emacs using SLIME <../news/2011/12/12/dswank.html>`_

    An exciting look at using SLIME and emacs for Dylan development.

.. raw:: html

     </div>
     <div class="span8">

     <h2>References</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>These are some lengthier reference materials. While they
       make for dry reading, they're full of invaluable information!</p>
     </div>

`Dylan Reference Manual
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/>`_ (`Errata
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/drm_errata.html>`_)

    The official definition of the Dylan language and standard library.

`Common Dylan library reference <core-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <core-reference/CoreReference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/core/index.htm>`__]

    Describes the Open Dylan implementation of the Dylan language, a
    common set of Dylan libraries, and a library interchange mechanism.
    The common libraries provide many language extensions, a threads
    interface, and object finalization.

`System and I/O library reference <system-io-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <system-io-reference/SystemAndIOReference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/io/index.htm>`__]

    Describes Open Dylan's printing and output formatting modules,
    a streams module, a sockets module, and modules providing an
    interface to operating system features such as the file system,
    time and date information, and the host machine environment.

`DUIM library reference
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/dref/index.htm>`_

    Describes the libraries forming DUIM (Dylan User Interface Manager),
    the portable window programming toolkit. It complements
    Building Applications Using DUIM.

`C FFI and Win32 library reference <cffi-win32-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <cffi-win32-reference/C-FFIandWin32Reference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/interop1/index.htm>`__]

    Describes a foreign function interface library for interoperation
    with C programs, and several libraries providing a low-level interface
    to the Microsoft Win32 API.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Open Dylan Developers</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>Notes and materials useful to those working on
       Open Dylan itself or have an interest in the low
       level details.</p>
     </div>

`Open Dylan Hacker's Guide <hacker-guide/index.html>`_
[`pdf <hacker-guide/OpenDylanHackersGuide.pdf>`__]

    A work in progress to help out people who are hacking on Open Dylan itself.

`Dylan Style Guide <style-guide/index.html>`_
[`pdf <style-guide/StyleGuide.pdf>`__]

    Notes and thoughts on how to format your Dylan code. This is the style
    guide that we aspire to adhere to in the Open Dylan sources.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Publications</h2>

`See our publications page <publications.html>`_.

.. raw:: html

      <hr>
      <h2>Archived Documentation</h2>

      <div class="alert-message block-message warning">
        <p>This is old documentation that we don't plan to
        bring forward. Let us know if there's interest in this
        material.</p>
      </div>

`Developing Component Software with CORBA
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/corba/index.htm>`_

    A tutorial and reference for CORBA interoperability using the Open Dylan ORB.

`OLE, COM, ActiveX and DBMS library reference
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/interop2/index.htm>`_

    Describes high and low level interfaces to COM, OLE, and
    ActiveX component technology, and generic DBMS support, through
    SQL with an ODBC backend.

.. raw:: html

      </div>
    </div>

Commit message:

Common Dylan libary reference -> Core library reference.  Grammar changes.

documentation/website/source/documentation/index.rst, after:

*************
Documentation
*************

.. warning:: We are in the process of converting over to a new documentation
   publishing system. Some documents are not entirely correct yet. We've
   retained links to the 'Old HTML' where relevant. These will be going away
   in the near future.
   :class: alert-message warning

.. raw:: html

   <div class="row">
     <div class="span8">

     <h2>Learning Dylan</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message success">
       <p>Just getting started with Open Dylan?  We recommend that
       you read the <a href="intro-dylan/">Introduction to Dylan</a>
       to get a feel for the language. After that, you can broaden
       your knowledge with the <a href="../books/dpg/">Dylan Programming</a>
       book.</p>
     </div>

`An Introduction to Dylan <intro-dylan/index.html>`_
[`pdf <intro-dylan/IntroductiontoDylan.pdf>`__]

    This tutorial is written primarily for those with solid programming
    experience in C++ or another object-oriented, static language. It
    provides a gentler introduction to Dylan than does the Dylan Reference
    Manual (DRM).

`Dylan Programming <http://opendylan.org/books/dpg/>`_

    A good, book length Dylan tutorial by several Harlequin employees.

`Getting Started with Open Dylan <getting-started/index.html>`_
[`pdf <getting-started/GettingStartedWithOpenDylan.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/env/index.htm>`__]

    Describes Open Dylan's interactive development environment.

`Building Applications Using DUIM <building-with-duim/index.html>`_
[`pdf <building-with-duim/BuildingApplicationsWithDUIM.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/dguide/index.htm>`__]

    Describes how to use DUIM (Dylan User Interface Manager),
    the portable window programming toolkit.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Cheat Sheets</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>Quick one-page sheets for common tasks.</p>
     </div>

`Dylan Cheat Sheet <cheatsheet.html>`_

    A cheat sheet to get you started with the basics of Dylan syntax.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Articles</h2>

    <div class="alert-message block-message info">
      <p>Featured articles and blog postings.</p>
    </div>

    <h3>Learning Dylan</h3>

`Procedural Dylan <../articles/procedural-dylan/index.html>`_ by Paul Haahr.

    This essay explores Dylan from the perspective of a programmer used to
    traditional procedural languages, such as Pascal or C.

.. raw:: html

    <h3>Tools</h3>

`Development inside emacs using SLIME <../news/2011/12/12/dswank.html>`_

    An exciting look at using SLIME and emacs for Dylan development.

.. raw:: html

     </div>
     <div class="span8">

     <h2>References</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>These are some lengthier reference materials. While they
       make for dry reading, they're full of invaluable information!</p>
     </div>

`Dylan Reference Manual
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/>`_ (`Errata
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/drm_errata.html>`_)

    The official definition of the Dylan language and standard library.

`Core library reference <core-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <core-reference/CoreReference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/core/index.htm>`__]

    Describes the Open Dylan implementation of the Dylan language, a
    core set of Dylan libraries, and a library interchange mechanism.
    The core libraries provide many language extensions, a threads
    interface, and object finalization.

`System and I/O library reference <system-io-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <system-io-reference/SystemAndIOReference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/io/index.htm>`__]

    Describes Open Dylan's printing and output formatting modules,
    a streams module, a sockets module, and modules providing an
    interface to operating system features such as the file system,
    time and date information, and the host machine environment.

`DUIM library reference
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/dref/index.htm>`_

    Describes the libraries forming DUIM (Dylan User Interface Manager),
    the portable window programming toolkit. It complements
    Building Applications Using DUIM.

`C FFI and Win32 library reference <cffi-win32-reference/index.html>`_
[`pdf <cffi-win32-reference/C-FFIandWin32Reference.pdf>`__]
[`old HTML <http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/interop1/index.htm>`__]

    Describes a foreign function interface library for interoperation
    with C programs, and several libraries providing a low-level interface
    to the Microsoft Win32 API.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>For Open Dylan Developers</h2>

     <div class="alert-message block-message info">
       <p>Notes and materials useful to those working on
       Open Dylan itself or those who have an interest in the low
       level details.</p>
     </div>

`Open Dylan Hacker's Guide <hacker-guide/index.html>`_
[`pdf <hacker-guide/OpenDylanHackersGuide.pdf>`__]

    A work in progress to help out people who are hacking on Open Dylan itself.

`Dylan Style Guide <style-guide/index.html>`_
[`pdf <style-guide/StyleGuide.pdf>`__]

    Notes and thoughts on how to format your Dylan code. This is the style
    guide that we aspire to adhere to in the Open Dylan sources.

.. raw:: html

     <hr>
     <h2>Publications</h2>

`See our publications page <publications.html>`_.

.. raw:: html

      <hr>
      <h2>Archived Documentation</h2>

      <div class="alert-message block-message warning">
        <p>This is old documentation that we don't plan to
        bring forward. Let us know if there's interest in this
        material.</p>
      </div>

`Developing Component Software with CORBA
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/corba/index.htm>`_

    A tutorial and reference for CORBA interoperability using the Open Dylan ORB.

`OLE, COM, ActiveX and DBMS library reference
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/opendylan/interop2/index.htm>`_

    Describes high and low level interfaces to COM, OLE, and
    ActiveX component technology, and generic DBMS support, through
    SQL with an ODBC backend.

.. raw:: html

      </div>
    </div>
