***********************
Creating CORBA Projects
***********************

About CORBA projects
====================

CORBA projects, such as those we saw in previous examples, are just
Dylan projects whose executable or DLL can operate as a CORBA server
or client. Servers and clients built from CORBA projects use the
Open Dylan ORB to communicate with other CORBA-based applications
across an interface specified in OMG IDL.

The most noticeable distinction between a CORBA project and other
projects is that a CORBA project contains a Open Dylan Tool
Specification (spec) file which identifies an IDL file containing an
IDL interface declaration.

Additionally, CORBA projects use protocol, stubs or skeletons projects
that are generated from an IDL file. The combination of these
generated projects used in a CORBA project depends on whether it is a
server or client project. Automatic generation of client stubs and
server skeletons from an IDL file is the standard way of providing a
transparent native-language interface for writing clients and servers
that can communicate with one another across an IDL interface using
CORBA.

Creating CORBA projects
=======================

To create a CORBA project with the New Project wizard:

#. Choose :menuselection:`File --> New...` from any window or click
   the New Project button in the main window.

   If you chose :menuselection:`File --> New...` from a project
   window, remember to uncheck the “Insert file into project?” box
   unless you intend your new project to be a subproject.

#. Select :guilabel:`Project` and click :guilabel:`OK`.

   The New Project wizard appears.

#. In the :guilabel:`Project Type` section, select :guilabel:`CORBA Client and/or Server` and click :guilabel:`Next`.

   The wizard’s CORBA options page appears.

   .. figure:: images/getstart-new-project.png

      Selecting an IDL file.

#. In the :guilabel:`CORBA IDL file` section, choose an IDL file on
   which to base the project.

   The wizard copies the IDL file into the project folder which you
   choose on the next wizard page. If the IDL file is already in that
   folder, it is left there.

   Alternatively, the wizard can generate a blank IDL file for
   you. Uncheck the “Use existing IDL file” to make that happen. The
   blank IDL file will be written into the project folder you choose
   on the next wizard page. The IDL file will have the same name as
   the project, with the extension ``.idl``.

#. In the :guilabel:`Projects to generate` section, choose whether to
   generate a client or server project, or both.

   The :guilabel:`Advanced...` button next to the client and server
   options produces a dialog containing several ORB-related
   options. See `Setting ORB options`_ for details.

#. Click :guilabel:`Next`.

   The next page is the standard wizard page for naming a project and
   specifying its location. (See `Getting Started with Open Dylan > Projects
   <https://opendylan.org/getting-started-ide/projects.html>`_ for details.)

   The project name you specify here is not used literally when the wizard
   creates the project or projects. Instead, if you chose to create a client
   project, the wizard creates a project called ``{name}-client``, where
   ``{name}`` is the project name you specified. If you chose to create a
   server project, the project will be called ``{name}-server``.

   Similarly, the project folder you specify is used as the overall
   project folder name, with the project files and sources for clients
   and servers in subfolders of the appropriate name. For a project
   folder ``phat``, you get the following structure on disk (assuming
   you chose to create both client and server projects)::

      phat\
        client\
        server\

   If you chose to create a blank IDL file for your project by unchecking
   the “Use existing IDL file” box, your blank IDL file is created in the
   top-level project folder::

      phat\
        client\
        server\
        phat.idl

   The client and server projects themselves are created in subfolders
   of the top-level project folder called :file:`client` and :file:`server`.

#. Enter a project name and location, and click :guilabel:`Next`.

   The wizard moves on to the "Use libraries" page. This and the remaining
   wizard pages are as for ordinary projects.

#. Complete the remaining pages in the wizard to finish specifying the
   non-CORBA parts of your project or projects.

.. note::
   If you choose to generate client and server projects, note that the
   project settings and library choices you make in the wizard will
   apply to both generated projects. If you want the two projects to
   have different settings or use different libraries, you must create
   both separately. The only exception to this is your choice of
   Advanced ORB Settings, which can be set differently for client and
   server projects in the “Projects to generate” section of the
   wizard’s CORBA options page. See `Setting ORB options`_.

.. note::
   The interface projects (that is, the client stubs, server
   skeletons, and protocol projects that provide a static interface to
   the main project’s IDL) are not generated until you first build
   your client or server project. When you do so, the IDL compiler is
   invoked and the necessary interface projects are created
   automatically. See `How the spec file affects IDL compilation`_ for
   details of what projects are generated and where.

Setting ORB options
===================

The Open Dylan ORB is supplied as a Dylan library called
``dylan-orb``, which both client and server CORBA projects use.

You can modify the default behavior of the ORB that a client or server
project will run on while you are specifying the project in the New
Project wizard. To set ORB options:

#. Click the appropriate :guilabel:`Advanced...` button on the New
   Project wizard’s CORBA options page.

   A client and server can use different settings, so there are two
   :guilabel:`Advanced...` buttons: one for a server project and one
   for a client project.

   .. figure:: images/projects-advanced-orb.png

      The Advanced ORB settings dialog

   The options you set in the Advanced ORB Settings dialog are
   translated into command-line arguments and added to the Command
   Line in the :menuselection:`Project --> Settings...` dialog’s
   :guilabel:`Debug` page. This command-line specification what is
   used to invoke the EXE or DLL for the project when you choose
   :menuselection:`Application --> Start`, :guilabel:`Debug`, or
   :guilabel:`Interact`. Thus, the Advanced ORB Settings arguments
   are passed to the server or client for use by the underlying ORB.

   .. note::
      Whether the ORB actually uses these settings is a different
      matter. Recall that, to initialize and gain an initial reference
      to an ORB, a client or server calls the ``corba/orb-init``
      method. (The name is as mapped to Dylan from the pseudo-IDL
      ``CORBA::ORB_init`` operation.) If the client or server does not
      pass any arguments in this call, the ORB will use the arguments
      from the command-line. If some arguments are passed, those
      arguments will override the command-line arguments.

The options available are as follows.

Trace ORB Operation
   Turns on debug messages inside the ORB. These messages are mainly
   internal debugging messages, but may help you to understand what is
   going on inside the ORB, or help you report problems the Open Dylan
   maintainers.

   Corresponds to the ORB command-line argument ``-ORBtrace``.

Suppress co-location optimization
   Forces the ORB to always use sockets and IIOP for marshalling, even
   when it might have detected an in-process (that is, co-located)
   server that could be communicated with more directly.

   Corresponds to the ORB command-line argument ``-ORBno-co-location``.

Debug server errors
   Suppresses handling of application implementation errors in server
   code. That is, instead of the errors being translated into CORBA
   exceptions for transmission to the client, they are left unhandled
   in the server so that they can be debugged.

   Corresponds to the ORB command-line argument ``-ORBdebug``.

Use alternative port number
   Sets the default socket port for listening. The default port number
   registered with IANA for the Open Dylan ORB is 3672.

   Corresponds to the ORB command-line argument ``-ORBport`` port-number.

The role of spec files in IDL compilation
=========================================

Open Dylan Tool Specification files, or spec files (extension:
``.spec``), allow tools other than the Dylan compiler to be invoked on
a project at build time. When the build encounters a spec file in a
project’s sources list, it examines its contents and invokes the tool
that the file specifies.

In the Open Dylan implementation, you can use spec files to call the
Open Dylan IDL compiler, Scepter, on an IDL file. This compilation
occurs during an ordinary project build, along with the compilation of
Dylan source files.

Spec files are ASCII-format files that you can write or modify
yourself. The following subsections describe the format for writing
spec files for CORBA projects.

To arrange for IDL compilation to occur during an ordinary project
build, the spec file must be part of the project’s sources list. The
New Project wizard inserts a spec file into CORBA projects
automatically. The spec file has the same name as the project, with
the extension ``.spec``.

The IDL compiler will not regenerate stubs, skeletons, or protocol
projects if they are up to date with respect to the IDL source
file. If a spec file is changed, this will force the IDL compiler to
regenerate code from the IDL source even if the IDL source itself has
not changed. This is necessary because some options in the spec file
may cause the generated code to change, for example the ``IDprefix:``
keyword.

Including the spec file in the project is useful because it brings all
the build work for a CORBA project together into a single build. Also,
by bringing the IDL file for the project under the control of Open
Dylan’s project management system, you no longer have to worry about
keeping the client stubs, server skeletons and protocol libraries up
to date with any changes to the IDL -- Open Dylan takes care of that.

How the spec file affects IDL compilation
-----------------------------------------

As we have seen in previous chapters, the IDL compiler is capable of
generating client stubs, server skeletons, and protocol support
projects from an IDL file. When there is a spec file in the project
being compiled, any projects the IDL compiler generates automatically
become subprojects of the main project.

This automatic inclusion only occurs because of the spec file in the
project. If you compiled the IDL file separately, using the IDL
compiler on the command line (see Chapter 9, “Using the Dylan IDL
Compiler”) the generated projects would not be made subprojects. You
would have to add them to the main project by hand in order to make
them subprojects.

By default, the generated projects are placed in subfolders of the
folder containing the IDL file. If you used the New Project wizard to
create the project you are compiling, and you chose to generate a
blank IDL file (by unchecking the “Use existing IDL file” box), the
IDL file will have been generated in the top-level project folder, and
thus the IDL compiler will put any projects it generates in subfolders
of the top-level project folder. This very conveniently puts all
subprojects associated with your main project under one folder.

Again by default, the subproject folders are named ``protocol``,
``stubs`` and ``skeletons``. There are spec file options which allow
some control over what the subfolders are called and also where they
are located.

Header information for CORBA spec files
---------------------------------------

The first line of any spec file must contain the ``Origin:``
keyword. For describing IDL source files to CORBA projects, the value
of this keyword must be ``OMG-IDL``. Thus the first line of a spec
file for IDL must be::

   Origin: OMG-IDL

Also required in the header of this kind of spec file is the keyword
``IDL-file:``, with a value that is a pathname for the IDL file that
is to be compiled. The pathname is interpreted relative to the folder
containing the spec file. As noted in Section 7.4.1, the folder
containing the IDL file will be used to store any projects generated
automatically from the IDL.

Note that a spec file can describe only one IDL file. However,
projects can contain more than one spec file.

For example, this is the minimum spec file for describing an IDL file
called :file:`bank.idl` that is in the folder bank, a sibling folder
of the folder containing the spec file.

.. code-block:: dylan-lid

   Origin:     OMG-IDL
   IDL-file:   ..\bank\bank.idl

Server keywords for CORBA spec files
--------------------------------------

To indicate that the CORBA project contains a server implementation
for the IDL file, use the keyword ``Skeletons:`` with the value
``yes``.

.. code-block:: dylan-lid

   Skeletons: yes

This ensures that Scepter generates a server skeletons project from
the IDL source. The server skeletons project is automatically made a
subproject of the CORBA project.

Client keywords for CORBA spec files
------------------------------------

To indicate that the CORBA project is a client of the service
described by the IDL file, use the keyword ``Stubs:`` with the value
``yes``. This ensures that Scepter compiler generates a client stubs
project from the IDL source. The client stubs project is automatically
made a subproject of the CORBA project.

.. code-block:: dylan-lid

   Stubs: yes

Sometimes, the CORBA client also needs to use the server skeletons
code generated from the IDL source; for example, where the IDL defines
a callback interface which the client must implement. In this case,
you should also include the ``Skeletons:`` keyword in the spec file
with the value ``yes``.

.. code-block:: dylan-lid

   Stubs: yes
   Skeletons: yes

Other keywords for CORBA spec files
-----------------------------------

The following keywords control other aspects of IDL compilation.

``directory:`` directory
   By default the IDL compiler puts the Dylan projects it generates
   into subdirectories/subfolders in the same directory/folder as the
   IDL source file. You can force it to put the
   subdirectories/subfolders in another elsewhere using this option.

   The directory can be an absolute or relative name. Relative names
   are resolved with respect to the directory/folder the spec file is
   in.

``prefix:`` directory-prefix
   The default names for the generated subdirectories/subfolders are
   :file:`protocol`, :file:`stubs`, and :file:`skeletons`.

   You can specify a prefix for these names with this ``prefix:``
   option. The prefix will be appended with a leading `-` character.

   This might be useful when you want to put the project
   subdirectories/subfolders from more than one IDL file in a common
   location.

``include:`` *directory*
   Adds *directory* to the search path list which the preprocessor uses
   to find files mentioned in ``#include`` directives.

   The directory can be an absolute or relative name. Relative names
   are resolved with respect to the directory/folder the spec file is
   in.

``case:`` ``yes`` | ``no``
   By default the IDL compiler ignores case when recognising keywords
   and identifiers, but when this option is set to ``yes``, the
   characters in identifiers and keywords must have exactly the same
   case as the identifier or keyword definition in order to be
   recognized.

   Default value: ``no``.

``clean:`` ``yes`` | ``no``
   If ``yes``, forces the IDL compiler to regenerate code irrespective
   of whether or not it thinks any generated code that exists is up to
   date with respect to the IDL source file.

   Default value: ``no``.

``protocol:   yes | no``
   If ``yes``, this option will ensure the IDL compiler generates the
   protocol library from the IDL source. The protocol project will be
   added as a subproject of the CORBA project. This option should be
   used by projects that wish to use the Dylan framework generated
   from the IDL source but not the stubs or skeletons code.

   Default value: ``no``.

Using IDL for non-CORBA work
============================

By default, when Scepter generates a stubs or skeletons project from
an IDL file, it also generates a protocol project. The protocol
project contains Dylan code mapped directly from the IDL file: open
generic functions and open classes. The protocol project does not
contain any low-level CORBA marshalling code, which is left to the
stubs and skeletons projects.

Thus the protocol project contains a pure Dylan protocol for
implementing a piece of software according to an IDL contract. This
can be useful for projects wishing to make use of the protocol without
necessarily using an ORB for communication. For example, an
application team might want to introduce the discipline of an IDL
description early on in the project lifecycle so that development work
on the clients and servers can proceed in parallel using dummy local
implementations of the other components.

To have Scepter generate a protocol project only, choose the
appropriate option in the Projects to Generate area of the New Project
wizard’s CORBA options page. Alternatively, after the project has been
created you can modify the its spec file to use the ``Protocol:``
keyword with the value ``yes``. Scepter will ensure the protocol
project is generated, but will not generate the stubs or skeletons
projects unless the ``Stubs:`` or ``Skeletons:`` keywords are also
present and have the value ``yes``.

The protocol project is automatically made a subproject of the CORBA
project.
