*******************************
Open Dylan 2012.1 Release Notes
*******************************


.. 1  Introduction
   2  Language Specification Changes
     2.1  C3 Superclass Linearization
   3  Library Changes
   4  Documentation Improvements
   5  dylan-compiler Improvements
     5.1  Relocatable Executables and Libraries
     5.2  Usability - Output and Locating Libraries
     5.3  Documentation Generation
     5.4  Dependency Graph Generation
   6  Code Generation Improvements
     6.1  Limited Collections
   7  C Back-end Changes
     7.1  Multi-threading
     7.2  Performance Improvements
     7.3  Shared Library Initialization
     7.4  Fixes
   8  C-FFI Changes
   9  Other Changes


Introduction
============

.. TODO: fix release date

This document describes the 2012.1 release of Open Dylan, released
March 7, 2012.

* `Download the release <http://opendylan.org/download/index.html>`_
* `Report bugs <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues>`_
* `Source code <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/v2012.1>`_

Language Specification Changes
==============================

We try to keep changes to the language definition few and far between
and limited to things that are either necessary or clear advantages.

C3 Superclass Linearization
---------------------------

Open Dylan now uses the C3 superclass linearization algorithm.  This
algorithm was originally designed for Dylan but for historical reasons
was never implemented in Dylan, until now.  In most cases this change
should not change the semantics of existing programs, but if it does
the compiler will issue a serious warning.  In a future release this
will be changed to non-serious warning, and then eventually the
warning will be removed completely.

.. TODO: add example of the warning?

See `DEP-0003 <http://opendylan.org/proposals/dep-0003.html>`_ for
more details.


Library Changes
===============

* The ``CL-plists`` module in the ``cl`` library has been removed.
  Any usages of it can be replaced by using the ``plists`` module
  from the ``collections`` library.  Additionally, the ``plists``
  module has been `documented
  <http://opendylan.org/documentation/library-reference/collections/plists.html>`_.

* Support for MacOS 9 locators has been removed. This is pre-OS X code
  and we don't support Mac OS 9 as a platform.

* The ``bit-vectors`` module in the ``collections`` library works
  correctly now on 64 bit platforms.

* The floating point support in the ``common-dylan`` library has
  been enhanced.

* The ``command-line-parser`` library has been relicensed and is now
  available for wider usage.  This replaces old command parsing code.
  This library has not yet been documented, but it has been cleaned
  up substantially and the API is much more consistent.

* ``load-library`` has now been implemented on Linux, Mac OS X and
  FreeBSD. Previously, this was only supported on Windows.

* A new ``strings`` library replaces the ``string-extensions``
  library.  The new library provides a simpler API with all names
  exported from a single ``strings`` module.  `DEP-0004
  <http://opendylan.org/proposals/dep-0004.html>`_ is currently the
  best documentation for this library.

* The ``string-extensions`` library has been removed.  Use the
  ``strings`` library instead.  Some of the functionality in
  ``string-extensions``, such as character sets, was moved to the
  regular-expressions library, which was the only thing using it.

* The ``functional-objects-extras`` module was not used and has been
  removed.

* The ``*open-accessors*`` table has been removed from the I/O library.

* Previously, sometimes using ``force-output()`` would also result
  in an ``fsync()`` without specifying ``synchronize?: #t``. This
  has been corrected. If you want to make sure that something
  makes it to the disk, either use ``sychronize-output()``
  or pass ``synchronize?: #t`` to ``force-output()``.

* ``format-date`` from the ``system`` library is faster.


Documentation Improvements
==========================

* All documentation has been converted to the Sphinx document
  generator.  This is a huge improvement in our ability to keep the
  documentation up-to-date, modernizes its look and feel, and allows
  us to generate various output formats.

* The core libraries documentation has been unified into one `Dylan
  Library Reference
  <http://opendylan.org/documentation/library-reference/index.html>`_
  document.

* The documentation on using the Open Dylan Console Environment has
  been rewritten and expanded.  A new section on the Dylan Interaction
  Mode for Emacs (DIME) has been added.  See both in `the Getting
  Started Guide
  <http://opendylan.org/documentation/getting-started/index.html>`_.


dylan-compiler Improvements
===========================

Relocatable Executables and Libraries
-------------------------------------

Previously, the executables and libraries built by the Dylan
compiler had to reside at a fixed path (set during compilation).

This has now been loosened up significantly on Linux, Mac OS X
and FreeBSD.  The same directory structure needs to be maintained
with the ``bin`` and ``lib`` directories, but the location in
the file system can change now.

On Linux and FreeBSD, this uses ``$ORIGIN`` support in the
dynamic linker.  On Mac OS X, this uses ``rpath`` support present
in Mac OS X 10.5 and later.


Usability - Output and Locating Libraries
-----------------------------------------

To simplify the build process, two changes were made to
``dylan-compiler``:

(1) Build products are now stored in ``./_build`` on non-Windows
    platforms instead of in ``~/Open-Dylan``.  This may still be
    overridden via the ``OPEN_DYLAN_USER_ROOT`` environment variable
    if you prefer to re-use the same build products across multiple
    different projects, but we don't recommend it.

(2) If the directory ``./registry`` exists, the compiler will add it
    to the beginning of the ``OPEN_DYLAN_USER_REGISTRIES`` environment
    variable so that those registry entries take precedence over
    others.

The intention is that for projects that use several other projects one
can now use git submodules and a project "registry" directory to make
the following work::

   $ git clone --recursive <url>
   $ cd <project-directory>
   $ dylan-compiler -build <project-name>

In the past it would be necessary to set various environment variables
and clone the central "registry" repository.  A minor side-effect of
this change is that if you work on several distinct projects you will
initially have to build all dependencies, down to and including the
``dylan`` library.


Debug Back-end Improvements
---------------------------

The debug back-end is used for printing the internal compiler
state (the DFM).

* calls are printed with more detail.
* keyword and constrain type checks are printed more accurately.
* primitive invocations of C functions via FFI are printed correctly.


Documentation Generation
------------------------

In addition to the documentation updates, we've also enhanced the
documentation generation feature within ``dylan-compiler`` to output
the new format.  This can be used by, first loading and compiling
a library and then::

   > export -format rst interface-reference

In a future release, the support currently present for the XML formatted
documentation will be removed.

Dependency Graph Generation
---------------------------

You can now generate a dependency graph (at the library level) for a
project in both text and GraphViz ``.dot`` format.  Open a project and::

   > export -format dot dependency-graph

or, for plain text::

   > export dependency-graph

Code Generation Improvements
============================

Limited Collections
-------------------

There were some bugs and some missed opportunities for optimization in
the limited collections code.


Consider the following constant:

.. code-block:: dylan

    define constant <float-vec> = limited(<vector>, of: <single-float>, size: 3);


The subtype relation was broken when the ``size:`` keyword is present:

.. code-block:: dylan

    let v = make(<float-vec>, fill: 0.0);
    instance?(v, <float-vec>);  // returns #f

This required fixing of ``instance?`` both in dfmc/modeling/types and
dylan/type.


Another issue with the same code was that the ``size`` method was not constant-folded at compile-time:

.. code-block:: dylan

    foo[1] := sin(foo[0]);

This line of code lead to the following intermediate (DFM) code, which
includes range checks (for both index 0 and 1):

.. code-block:: dylan

    t32 := SLOT-VALUE-INITD({{ foo }}, size)
    t39 := [PRIMOP cast-integer-as-raw(t32)]
    t44 := [PRIMOP machine-word-unsigned-less-than?(^%1, t39)]
    IF (t44)
      t51 := REPEATED-SLOT-VALUE({{ foo }}, single-float-vector-element, ^%1)
    ELSE
      *t28(1) := [CALLi ^{<&method> element-range-error (<collection>, <object>)}({{ foo }}, ^0)]
      t71 := *t28(1) [0]
      t70 := [PRIMOP single-float-as-raw(t71)]
    END IF
    t74 := [IF-MERGE t51 t70]
    t67 := [PRIMOP single-float-sin(t74)]
    t68 := [PRIMOP raw-as-single-float(t67)]
    t85 := [PRIMOP machine-word-unsigned-less-than?(^%5, t39)]
    IF (t85)
      REPEATED-SLOT-VALUE({{ foo }}, single-float-vector-element, ^%5) := t67
    ELSE
      [CALLi ^{<&method> element-range-error (<collection>, <object>)}({{ foo }}, ^1)]
    END IF
    [IF-MERGE #f #f]

The same Dylan code is now translated into the following DFM code:

.. code-block:: dylan

    t19 := REPEATED-SLOT-VALUE({{ foo }}, single-float-vector-element, ^%1)
    t20 := [PRIMOP single-float-sin(t19)]
    t21 := [PRIMOP raw-as-single-float(t20)]
    REPEATED-SLOT-VALUE({{ foo }}, single-float-vector-element, ^%5) := t20

This required fixes in the modeling, typist and optimization parts of
the compiler.


A third issue was that the type inference always used the inferred
type of the actual instance. This failed for primitive types,
``<single-float>`` was used instead of ``<raw-single-float>``. This
lead towards code which the C compiler could not compile
(``incompatible code in assignment``):

.. code-block:: dylan

    a[0] := - a[0];

This required a fix in the typist.

Miscellaneous Fixes
-------------------

The control flow graph could be incorrect if an unwind-protect without
a body is optimized.

Some slot initializer constants (floats in particular) when inherited
between classes in different files would result in compilation errors.

The compiler would crash when the ``dimensions:`` keyword was not given
when constructing an ``<array>``.

The compiler now warns rather than crashes on invalid inherited slot
specifications.

C Back-end Changes
==================

Multi-threading
---------------

The C back-end now fully supports multi-threading.  Several bugs
unrelated to threading were also fixed in this work, which should
improve the stability of the C back-end in general.

This work is currently experimental and may have stability and
performance issues.  Further feedback is welcome.

.. TODO: moar details

Performance Improvements
------------------------

Previously, the C run-time was allocating unwind-protect control
structures on the heap using the Garbage Collector. Additionally,
unwind-protect was preserving signal state on some platforms, notably
Mac OS X.  Together, this led to the C back-end being notably slower
than the native HARP back-end when unwind-protects were used.

This has been fixed and the resulting code can run in 50-80% of the
time that it previously took. This is particularly true for users
of the I/O libraries which make heavy use of unwind-protect.

The C back-end was previously performing 2 type checks on keyword
arguments. It now correctly only performs this check once.

Shared Library Initialization
-----------------------------

The C back-end now generates shared libraries which can be used with
``dlopen()``.  This behavior is in line with the libraries generated
by the native HARP back-end.

Fixes
-----

Some other bugs that resulted in the generation of invalid C have
been fixed.

We now abort when applying too many arguments in C run-time.

A compilation crash with C back-end when trying to emit an overflown
integer has been fixed.

Stack usage in method dispatch has been reduced. This fixes an issue
where a default sized stack would be exhausted on 64 bit platforms,
especially while building the compiler.

Floating point constants could in some circumstances be corrupted
when compiled.

C-FFI Changes
=============

C-variable setters
------------------

Setters should work with C-variables now.

Constant Slot Syntax
--------------------

You can now use ``constant slot`` when defining a ``C-struct`` rather than having to set ``setter: #f``.
This makes the syntax closer to normal class definitions:

.. code-block:: dylan

    define C-struct <Point>
      constant slot x-coord :: <C-unsigned-short>;
      constant slot y-coord :: <C-unsigned-short>;
    end;


Other Changes
=============

Running dylan-compiler under gdb with fdmake
--------------------------------------------

Sometimes, it is useful to be able to run ``dylan-compiler`` under ``gdb`` while doing a bootstrap build
using fdmake. This is now easy to do::

    make FDMAKE_OPTIONS=--gdb 3-stage-bootstrap

Unfortunately, gdb doesn't return a correct exit status, so the build will fail after the first invocation
of ``dylan-compiler``, but this is useful when looking into repeatable crashes.
