*******************************
Open Dylan 2014.1 Release Notes
*******************************

Introduction
============

This document describes the 2014.1 release of Open Dylan, released
XXX XX, 2014.

* `Download the release <http://opendylan.org/download/index.html>`_
* `Report bugs <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues>`_
* `Source code <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/v2014.1>`_

Build System
============

* The Jam files for Linux, FreeBSD and OS X have been updated to support
  doing a build when there are spaces in the path to the current working
  directory. This was previously only handled correctly for Windows.

* The arguments to configure have changed for specifying which garbage
  collector to use. The arguments are now::

    --with-gc=mps|boehm
    --with-gc-path=path/to/gc

  If the GC is Boehm and it is installed system-wide, then the
  ``with-gc-path`` parameter should not be needed. It is always
  necessary for MPS and is needed for Boehm if Boehm is installed
  into a non-standard location.

* A bug introduced in 2013.2 that broke the handling of ``jam-includes``
  has been fixed.

Compiler
========

* The intermediate language of the compiler, named Dylan Flow Machine,
  has been instrumented with tracing facilities. Changes to the control
  and data flow, as well as optimization information, can be received by
  setting the ``*trace-dfm-callback*`` (exported from the
  ``dfmc-flow-graph``) variable to a unary function. The variable
  ``*trace-dfm-outputter*`` should also be set (``structured-output``,
  exported from the ``dfmc-debug-back-end`` library might be useful).

  The argument to the ``*trace-dfm-callback`` itself is a property list
  containing at least a ``type`` key, a source location (``method``,
  ``file``, ``library`` keys), likely a ``nodeid`` key, and various
  other information.

  Compiling the ``dylan`` library with tracing emits lots of
  data (250MB). Therefore, a filtering can be established on a file
  name, method name, and/or library name. The variables
  ``*trace-dfm-library*``, ``*trace-dfm-file*``, and
  ``*trace-dfm-method*`` are of type ``false-or(<symbol>)`` and are exported
  from the ``dfmc-flow-graph`` library.

  An example user of this interface is on `GitHub
  <https://github.com/hannesm/visualization-middleware>`_.  A
  screencast showing an earlier implementation of this optimization
  visualization `can be seen here
  <https://opendylan.org/~hannes/test4.avi>`_.

* The C back-end would emit character constants that current versions
  of clang considered an error. The C back-end now generates a better
  representation.

* The output of ``dylan-compiler`` is less verbose by default.  Use
  the ``-verbose`` flag to get the old behavior.

* Some extensions to the Dylan language that have been present in the
  Open Dylan compiler for a long time have been documented, including
  extensions to the macro system and an alternative syntax for currying
  functions.

C-FFI
=====

* There is a new ``objc-selector-definer`` compiler macro. This supports
  the Objective C / Dylan bridge by allowing the definition of Objective
  C selectors and functions for sending them, complete with type
  information.

  An example usage from the Objective C / Dylan bridge library is:

  .. code-block:: dylan

     define objc-selector sel/alloc
       parameter target :: <objc/class>;
       result objc-instance :: <objc/instance-address>;
       selector: "alloc";
     end;

  This must be used in conjunction with the Objective C / Dylan
  bridge library.

* A result of a ``C-function`` may now be flagged as an ``error-result`` which
  means that the import function will be called, but the actual value will not
  be returned. This is useful for wrapping C APIs which return error codes that
  should signal conditions when an error occurs.

C Run-time
==========

* ``debug-message`` no longer crashes when printing some conditions.


Common Dylan
============

* The ``simple-io`` module has been renamed to ``simple-format``.
  A convenience module that re-exports ``simple-format`` has been
  left as ``simple-io`` for short term compatibility.

* The ``format-to-string`` function has been moved to the newly
  renamed ``simple-format`` module. This function is no longer
  exported from ``common-extensions``. You no longer need to
  exclude this function from ``common-dylan`` or ``common-extensions``
  if you use the ``format`` module from the ``io`` library.

* The ``<timer>`` class has been renamed to ``<profiling-timer>``.

* The function ``integer-to-string`` is now faster.

* On Mac OS X, application-filename() now returns the full absolute
  path. It also handles symlinks correctly now. This means that
  a symlink to a Dylan executable will function correctly as it
  already did on Linux and FreeBSD.

* The routine used for printing function signatures when displaying
  an error / condition now shows a more accurate signature rather
  than only the function specializers.


Debugging
=========

* When using `LLDB <http://lldb.llvm.org/>`_ for debugging, Dylan
  support is now available. To use this, you need to import the
  Python scripts::

    command script import /path/to/opendylan/tools/lldb/dylan

  Do not import the scripts under that directory directly. Once this
  has been loaded, then commands like ``frame variable`` will automatically
  start showing Dylan values::

    (lldb) frame variable
    (dylan_value) mepargs_ = 0xbfffd4c0 {<simple-object-vector>: size: 2} {
      [0] = 0x00000009 {<integer>: 2}
      [1] = 0x02861eb0 {<byte-char-file-stream>}
    }
    (dylan_value) e_ = 0x0018a288 {<absent-engine-node>}
    (dylan_value) parent_ = 0x005cc384 {<incremental-generic-function>: do-execute-command}
    (dylan_value) T3 = 0x00000000 {}


dfmc-execution
==============

* ``dfmc-execution`` provides a framework for interpreting the compiler's
  IR (DFM). It has been experimentally restored from the source control
  history and some basic tests have been created in ``sources/dfmc/testing/``.
  It currently has many limitations and bugs which we are still working
  out.

* We are evaluating using ``dfmc-execution`` to replace or augment
  the capabilities of ``^top-level-eval-using-optimization`` in
  ``dfmc-conversion``.

* We are interested in hearing what sort of things people may be interested
  in using this for.


Dylan
=====

* There is now an specialized implementation of ``member?`` defined
  for searching for a ``<byte-character>`` in a ``<byte-string>``.


dylan-direct-c-ffi
==================

* Much like ``%call-c-function`` for low-level C-FFI, there is now
  a ``%objc-msgsend`` for low-level Objective C messaging integration.
  More information about this will be forthcoming in an ``objc-dylan``
  bridge library.

  ``%objc-msgsend`` takes the target and selector as ``<raw-machine-word>``
  values. As with ``%call-c-function``, all values passed in and returned
  should be raw values.

  If you need the ``objc_msgSend_stret`` or other variants, pass
  ``c-modifiers: "_stret"`` or similar after the selector. The value
  passed here will be appended to ``objc_msgSend`` so it works for all
  variants, including sending to the super (``objc_msgSendSuper``, etc).

  .. code-block:: dylan

      %objc-msgsend (target, selector)
         (argument :: <raw-type>)
       => ()
        (argument-as-raw)
      end;


hash-algorithms
===============

* A crash resulting from memory corruption when using sha-1 has been
  fixed.

* The library now builds on Windows.


IO
==

* New functions ``format-err`` and ``force-err`` have been added that
  do the same thing as ``format-out`` and ``force-out``, but operate
  on ``*standard-error*`` rather than ``*standard-output*``.


make-dylan-app
==============

* ``make-dylan-app`` is now included in the Windows distribution.


strings
=======

* String comparison and equality operations are now 10 times faster
  when they are known to be on byte-strings.


system
======

* The function ``format-date`` is now faster.
* The ``copy-file`` method on Unix no longer fails when the path contains
  spaces.
* The ``#"write-date`` file property has been removed. It was identical to
  ``#"modification-date"``, so use that instead.
* Iterating over a directory with ``do-directory`` will no longer crash
  on ``x86_64-darwin``.


Testworks
=========

* Compiler warnings are now produced when a test or suite is unused.
  For example, it is easy to forget to add a test to any suite.  As a
  side effect of this change, it is now necessary to organize test
  suite code in a bottom-up style.  That is, you must define tests and
  suites *before* including them in a suite definition in your source
  file.  If you don't, you will receive a warning about an "Illegal
  forward reference".

* Benchmarks are once again supported.  See the `documentation
  <http://opendylan.org/documentation/testworks/usage.html>`_ for
  details.
