*****************
Open Dylan 2021.1
*****************

This document describes the 2021.1 release of Open Dylan, released XX MMM, 2021.
This release contains many enhancements and bug fixes, highlights
of which are listed below.  For complete details see `the opendylan commit logs
<https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/compare/v2020.1.0...v2021.1.0>`_. (Note
that some commit logs, for example for testworks and other libraries that are
included in Open Dylan as git submodules, may be in other repositories.)

* Download the release: http://opendylan.org/download
* Read documentation: http://opendylan.org/documentation
* Report problems: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues


Compiler
========

* Fixed a crash in the optimizer that ocurred when compiling certain
  C-FFI primitive functions.

* Improved support for code generation of ``apply`` calls to known
  methods.

* Improved source line tracking in the generated code, reducing the
  occurence of code marked as being at line 0 by the debugger.

Run-time
========

* Fixed a problem that prevented treating invalid keyword arguments as
  run-time warnings (`bug 1386
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1386>`_)

Platform Support
================

* The 64-bit RISC-V architecture (rv64gc ISA) is now supported on
  Linux.

IDE
===

CORBA
=====

DUIM
====

GTK
===

Debugging
=========

Documentation
=============

Build System
============

Library Changes
===============

dylan Library
-------------

common-dylan Library
--------------------

* ``integer-to-string`` has a new *lowercase?* keyword argument. When true,
  lowercase characters are used when *base* is above 10.

io Library
----------

* The behavior of the ``%x`` format directive has changed. "%x" now outputs
  lowercase hexadecimal numbers and "%X" outputs uppercase. The old behavior
  was to always output uppercase. Fixes `bug 1054
  <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1054>`_.

system Library
--------------

* A segmentation fault when using ``list-locator`` was fixed (`bug 1372 <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues/1372>`_).

c-ffi Library
-------------

network library
---------------

testworks Library
-----------------

collections Library
-------------------

* The ``table`` macro has been renamed to ``tabling``. ``table`` is not an
  unlikely name for a function parameter when writing code that generically
  operates on tables, and the existence of the ``table`` macro causes a
  confusing compiler warning for references to that name that aren't in the
  correct form.

big-integers library
--------------------

progress-stream library
-----------------------

gabriel-benchmarks library
--------------------------

Contributors
============

We'd like to thank all the people that made contributions to this release and
to surrounding libraries in the Dylan ecosystem. This list is probably
incomplete...

