documentation/getting-started-ide/source/preface.rst, before:

*******
Preface
*******

This guide explains how to use Open Dylan to develop and deliver Dylan
applications.  There are three relatively independent sections
covering command-line usage, Dylan Interaction Mode for Emacs (DIME),
and then the IDE (Windows only) which makes up the bulk of this
document.

The Dylan Reference Manual
==========================

The `Dylan Reference Manual <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/>`_
(Shalit, 1996) is published by Addison Wesley Developers’ Press, ISBN
0-201-44211-6. In this guide, we refer to the *Dylan Reference Manual*
as “the DRM”.

Chapters in this guide
======================

The first chapter in this guide covers how to use Open Dylan from
the command-line and how to use DIME (Dylan Interaction Mode for
Emacs).  The remainder of the guide is dedicated to doing development
with the IDE (on Windows only).

The early chapters on the IDE give you a quick tour of the
application development cycle under Open Dylan, using the Reversi
example for illustration. In these early chapters we come across most of
the Open Dylan development tools. Later chapters examine those
tools more directly, and provide a broader view of the development
process in Open Dylan.

:doc:`console`, shows how to use Open Dylan from the command-line.

:doc:`quick-start`, shows how to build a
standalone executable application in Open Dylan. It discusses the
Open Dylan main window and the project window.

:doc:`expanding`, shows how to make changes to your application
sources and how to debug compile-time and run-time errors. It discusses
the project window, the debugger, the editor, and the browser.

:doc:`model`, gives an overview of the programming model in
Open Dylan.

:doc:`projects`, discusses the New Project wizard, and looks at
the project window in more detail.

:doc:`browsing`, shows how you can examine the sources of a
project, and run-time values in an application, using the browser.

:doc:`debug`, returns to the debugger and studies it in more
detail.

:doc:`remotedbg`, describes how to debug a Dylan application
running on another machine.

:doc:`coloring`, describes the editor’s facility for coloring
source code to show the degree to which it has been optimized.

:doc:`delivery`, shows how you can package an application with
everything necessary to deliver it to customers as a stand-alone
product.

Commit message:

[doc] Remove cli chapter from getting started guide

documentation/getting-started-ide/source/preface.rst, after:

*******
Preface
*******

This guide explains how to use the Open Dylan IDE (Windows only) to develop
and deliver Dylan applications.

For help getting started with the command-line
tools, see the `Getting Started with the Open Dylan Command Line Tools
<http://opendylan.org/documentation/getting-started-cli>`_ guide.

The Dylan Reference Manual
==========================

The `Dylan Reference Manual <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/>`_
(Shalit, 1996) is published by Addison Wesley Developers’ Press, ISBN
0-201-44211-6. In this guide, we refer to the *Dylan Reference Manual*
as “the DRM”.

Chapters in this guide
======================

The early chapters on the IDE give you a quick tour of the
application development cycle under Open Dylan, using the Reversi
example for illustration. In these early chapters we come across most of
the Open Dylan development tools. Later chapters examine those
tools more directly, and provide a broader view of the development
process in Open Dylan.

:doc:`quick-start`, shows how to build a
standalone executable application in Open Dylan. It discusses the
Open Dylan main window and the project window.

:doc:`expanding`, shows how to make changes to your application
sources and how to debug compile-time and run-time errors. It discusses
the project window, the debugger, the editor, and the browser.

:doc:`model`, gives an overview of the programming model in
Open Dylan.

:doc:`projects`, discusses the New Project wizard, and looks at
the project window in more detail.

:doc:`browsing`, shows how you can examine the sources of a
project, and run-time values in an application, using the browser.

:doc:`debug`, returns to the debugger and studies it in more
detail.

:doc:`remotedbg`, describes how to debug a Dylan application
running on another machine.

:doc:`coloring`, describes the editor’s facility for coloring
source code to show the degree to which it has been optimized.

:doc:`delivery`, shows how you can package an application with
everything necessary to deliver it to customers as a stand-alone
product.
