documentation/README.rst, before:

This is the documentation for Open Dylan.

It is built using `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org>`_. All content is written
using ReStructured Text with Sphinx extensions.

Preparation
===========

Before building this documentation, you will need a copy of Sphinx installed.
The easiest way to do this is to get it from the `Python Package Index
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/Sphinx>`_ or to use ``easy_install``::

    sudo easy_install -U Sphinx

You will also need to have the git submodule for our Sphinx extension
populated.  If this is not present for you, try doing this at the
top level of the opendylan repository::

    git submodule init && git submodule update

Building
========

Building the documentation is easy on a system with ``make``::

    make html

If you are on Windows, there is a ``make.bat`` as well::

    make.bat html

The generated documentation will be in ``build/html``.

You can build other formats as well. Run ``make`` or ``make.bat`` without
arguments to see which formats are available.

Link Validation
---------------

Sphinx also makes it easy to check that all of the links to external sites
are valid.  You can run the link checker by::

    make linkcheck


Section Header Markup
=====================

We are following the `Sphinx suggestions
<http://sphinx.pocoo.org/rest.html#sections>`_ for header markup, which
are as follows:
    
    * # with overline, for parts
    * \* with overline, for chapters
    * =, for sections
    * -, for subsections
    * ^, for subsubsections
    * ", for paragraphs

Note that most files will correspond to a chapter and hence will start
with "`*`".  By convention we use over *and* under markup at this level.


Dylan Language Markup
=====================

We have created a Dylan language Sphinx domain to make it easier to document and
refer to Dylan language entities. This domain is documented in the
"dylandomain/reference.rst" file in the "sphinx-extensions" repository.

Commit message:

Add a note about using SimpleHTTPServer to view the docs locally.

documentation/README.rst, after:

This is the documentation for Open Dylan.

It is built using `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org>`_. All content is written
using ReStructured Text with Sphinx extensions.

Preparation
===========

Before building this documentation, you will need a copy of Sphinx installed.
The easiest way to do this is to get it from the `Python Package Index
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/Sphinx>`_ or to use ``easy_install``::

    sudo easy_install -U Sphinx

You will also need to have the git submodule for our Sphinx extension
populated.  If this is not present for you, try doing this at the
top level of the opendylan repository::

    git submodule init && git submodule update

Building
========

Building the documentation is easy on a system with ``make``::

    make html

If you are on Windows, there is a ``make.bat`` as well::

    make.bat html

The generated documentation will be in ``build/html``.  Just viewing
the HTML locally may not correctly load the CSS files.  A workaround
is to cd into ``build/html`` and run a web server.  For example::

  python -m SimpleHTTPServer

You can build other formats as well. Run ``make`` or ``make.bat`` without
arguments to see which formats are available.

Link Validation
---------------

Sphinx also makes it easy to check that all of the links to external sites
are valid.  You can run the link checker by::

    make linkcheck


Section Header Markup
=====================

We are following the `Sphinx suggestions
<http://sphinx.pocoo.org/rest.html#sections>`_ for header markup, which
are as follows:
    
    * # with overline, for parts
    * \* with overline, for chapters
    * =, for sections
    * -, for subsections
    * ^, for subsubsections
    * ", for paragraphs

Note that most files will correspond to a chapter and hence will start
with "`*`".  By convention we use over *and* under markup at this level.


Dylan Language Markup
=====================

We have created a Dylan language Sphinx domain to make it easier to document and
refer to Dylan language entities. This domain is documented in the
"dylandomain/reference.rst" file in the "sphinx-extensions" repository.
