documentation/website/source/community/index.rst, before:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="row">
    <div class="span3 bs-docs-sidebar">
      <ul class="nav nav-list bs-docs-sidenav" data-spy="affix">
        <li><a href="#development"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Development</a></li>
        <li><a href="#irc"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> IRC Channel</a></li>
        <li><a href="#newsgroup"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Newsgroup</a></li>
        <li><a href="#mailing-lists"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Mailing Lists</a></li>
        <li><a href="#other-sites"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Other sites</a></li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <div class="span9">

*********
Community
*********

Here are some resources for keeping up with what's going on in the Dylan hacker
community...

.. _development:

Development
===========

- `All of our repositories on GitHub <https://github.com/dylan-lang/>`_
- `Continuous build server <https://jenkins.opendylan.org/>`_.
- `TODO lists tracked on Trello <https://trello.com/opendylan>`_
- `Open bugs for Open Dylan <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues>`_
- `How to contribute </documentation/hacker-guide/contribute.html>`_
- `Open projects, looking for contributors and help <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/wiki>`_

.. _irc:

The #dylan IRC channel
======================

The #dylan channel on Freenode.net is where most of the day-to-day Dylan activity
takes place.  Since Dylan hackers are spread around the world (New Zealand,
Germany, East and West coast USA, South America, ...) there's usually someone
online at all times of day.  The channel is logged at
http://colabti.org/irclogger/irclogger_logs/dylan so you can always ask a
question and then check the logs for answers later.

To discuss coding issues you can paste your code to the #dylan channel via
http://paste.lisp.org/new/dylan or any other pastebin site.  See previous
pastes here: http://paste.lisp.org/list/dylan

.. _newsgroup:

Newsgroup comp.lang.dylan
=========================

This is the newsgroup dedicated to the discussion of Dylan.  If you have a
question about the Dylan language or about something that will be of interest
to the Dylan community at large this is the preferred place for it.  It is one
of the few ways that the world at large can see that there is activity in the
Dylan community and thus aids us in our quest for World Domination.
Announcements should be directed here, as well as to the announce@ list below.
 
`comp.lang.dylan <http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.dylan/topics>`_ can
be browsed and subscribed to using Google Groups if you do not have access
to a news server.

Mailing Lists
=============

There are several mailing lists.  Which ones you join depends on your level of
interest and involvement:

`hackers@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    The public development list.  This is a good place to start if you have
    a question or would like to contribute.  Lurkers are also welcome!
    Very low traffic.

`announce@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    Find out about new releases! This is an extremely low-traffic list
    reserved for announcements.  If you subscribe to hackers@, you are on
    this list.

`chatter@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    This list contains nothing but Git commit messages.
    It's for developers who want to know everything that's going on.

__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/hackers
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/hackers/
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/announce
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/announce/
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/chatter
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/chatter/

Other sites:
============

- `Twitter <https://twitter.com/DylanLanguage>`_
- `Google Plus <https://plus.google.com/109036375650377247852>`_
- `Stack Overflow <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/dylan>`_

.. raw:: html

    </div>
  </div>

Commit message:

Add contributing section, rework development.
I also removed the link to Trello as we're tracking that info
in the wiki now.

documentation/website/source/community/index.rst, after:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="row">
    <div class="span3 bs-docs-sidebar">
      <ul class="nav nav-list bs-docs-sidenav" data-spy="affix">
        <li><a href="#contribute"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> How to Contribute</a></li>
        <li><a href="#development"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Development</a></li>
        <li><a href="#irc"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> IRC Channel</a></li>
        <li><a href="#newsgroup"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Newsgroup</a></li>
        <li><a href="#mailing-lists"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Mailing Lists</a></li>
        <li><a href="#other-sites"><i class="icon-chevron-right"></i> Other sites</a></li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <div class="span9">

*********
Community
*********

Here are some resources for keeping up with what's going on in the Dylan hacker
community...

.. _contribute:

How to Contribute
=================

We have a `list of open projects`_ that are looking for contributors and
help. These projects range in difficulty and some don't even require
knowledge of Dylan.

We also have some `guidelines and recommendations`_ for people who are
interested in contributing to Open Dylan.

.. _list of open projects: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/wiki
.. _guidelines and recommendations: https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.rst

.. _development:

Development
===========

All of our repositories are available on `GitHub`_.
Some repositories have been `archived`_ as they are historical in nature.

- `Continuous build server <https://jenkins.opendylan.org/>`_.
- `Open bugs for Open Dylan <https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/issues>`_

.. _GitHub: https://github.com/dylan-lang/
.. _archived: https://github.com/dylan-hackers/

.. _irc:

The #dylan IRC channel
======================

The #dylan channel on Freenode.net is where most of the day-to-day Dylan activity
takes place.  Since Dylan hackers are spread around the world (New Zealand,
Germany, East and West coast USA, South America, ...) there's usually someone
online at all times of day.  The channel is logged at
http://colabti.org/irclogger/irclogger_logs/dylan so you can always ask a
question and then check the logs for answers later.

To discuss coding issues you can paste your code to the #dylan channel via
http://paste.lisp.org/new/dylan or any other pastebin site.  See previous
pastes here: http://paste.lisp.org/list/dylan

.. _newsgroup:

Newsgroup comp.lang.dylan
=========================

This is the newsgroup dedicated to the discussion of Dylan.  If you have a
question about the Dylan language or about something that will be of interest
to the Dylan community at large this is the preferred place for it.  It is one
of the few ways that the world at large can see that there is activity in the
Dylan community and thus aids us in our quest for World Domination.
Announcements should be directed here, as well as to the announce@ list below.
 
`comp.lang.dylan <http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.dylan/topics>`_ can
be browsed and subscribed to using Google Groups if you do not have access
to a news server.

Mailing Lists
=============

There are several mailing lists.  Which ones you join depends on your level of
interest and involvement:

`hackers@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    The public development list.  This is a good place to start if you have
    a question or would like to contribute.  Lurkers are also welcome!
    Very low traffic.

`announce@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    Find out about new releases! This is an extremely low-traffic list
    reserved for announcements.  If you subscribe to hackers@, you are on
    this list.

`chatter@lists.opendylan.org`__ (`Archives`__)
    This list contains nothing but Git commit messages.
    It's for developers who want to know everything that's going on.

__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/hackers
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/hackers/
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/announce
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/announce/
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/mailman/listinfo/chatter
__ https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/chatter/

Other sites:
============

- `Twitter <https://twitter.com/DylanLanguage>`_
- `Google Plus <https://plus.google.com/109036375650377247852>`_
- `Stack Overflow <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/dylan>`_

.. raw:: html

    </div>
  </div>
