*****************************
Type-Safe Limited Collections
*****************************
        
===============  ===============
DEP-Number:      0007
Author:          Dustin Voss
Status:          Draft
Type:            Standards Track
Affects-DRM:     Yes
Created:         28-Jul-2013
Last-Modified:   17-Dec-2013
Post-History:    28-Jul-2013
Target-Version:  2013.2
===============  ===============

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

To improve type safety of collections and particularly limited collections,
this DEP adds a ``default-fill:`` keyword argument to limited collection
classes and an ``element-type-fill`` and ``element-type`` getter to all
collections.


Specification
=============

The collection classes that allow a ``fill:`` keyword argument are:

- ``<array>``
- ``<vector>``
- ``<simple-vector>``
- ``<simple-object-vector>``
- ``<stretchy-vector>``
- ``<deque>``
- ``<list>``
- ``<string>``
- ``<byte-string>``
- ``<unicode-string>``

This DEP refers to these classes as *fillable collection classes*. Fillable
collection classes are comprised of all the direct and indirect subclasses of
``<mutable-sequence>`` excepting ``<mutable-sequence>`` itself, ``<pair>``, and
``<empty-list>``.


``limited``
-----------

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes will each add the
following additional parameter:

====================  ==========================================
Class                 Parameter
====================  ==========================================
``<string>``          ``#key default-fill :: <character> = ' '``
``<byte-string>``     ``#key default-fill :: K1 = C1``
``<unicode-string>``  ``#key default-fill :: K2 = C2``
All others            ``#key default-fill :: <object> = #f``
====================  ==========================================

*K1* and *K2* are unspecified subclasses of ``<character>``. *C1* and *C2* are
unspecified values equivalent to a space character.

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes each return a limited
type designated *L*. The ``fill:`` init-keyword of all *L* will have a default
value identical to the default value listed above instead of ``#f``.

The ``type-for-copy`` method on instances of *L* will return a limited type *L2*
as described in the [DRM]_, but with the additional requirement that *L2* will
have the same default filler object as *L* (i.e., the same ``default-fill:``
argument).

The defaulted or supplied ``default-fill:`` argument should be an instance of
the element type of the collection. However, it is not an error to supply a
default filler object that the collection cannot accommodate, since a call to
``make`` may specify a filler object of the correct type.


``element-type-fill``
---------------------

A new open generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   element-type-fill (coll :: <collection>) => (fill-object :: <object>)

For instances of a limited fillable collection class type, this function will
return the (possibly defaulted) ``default-fill:`` argument to ``limited``. For
instances of all other fillable collection classes, this function will return
the following:

====================  ============  
Class                 Return Value
====================  ============  
``<string>``          ``' '``
``<byte-string>``     C1
``<unicode-string>``  C2
All others            ``#f``
====================  ============  

*C1* and *C2* are unspecified values equivalent to a space character.

It is an error to call ``element-type-fill`` on an instance of a collection
class that does not support the ``fill:`` init-keyword. However,
implementations may find this difficult to check (because users can introduce
that keyword in any subclass) and may return ``#f`` for such collections
instead. Portable programs should not rely on this behavior.


``element-type``
----------------

A new open generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   element-type (coll :: <collection>) => (element-type :: <type>)

For instances of collection classes with a limited element type, this function
will return that element type. For instances of other collection classes, this
function will return the element type described in
`Element Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Element_Types>`__ of the [DRM]_.


Motivation
==========

The second paragraph of the 
`Collection Operations <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Collection_Operations>`__
section of the [DRM]_ states the following:

   Note to implementors: Functions such as ``map``, ``map-as`` that return a
   new collection cannot rely on the type they instantiate having a valid
   default for ``fill:``. Therefore, when the size of the result is nonzero,
   these functions should compute the first element of the result before making
   the collection and specify that element as the ``fill:`` value. Otherwise a
   spurious type error could occur when making the collection.
   
However, there is a problem with the ``size-setter`` method that is not
addressed by the above note. That method may be called on an empty collection
to grow it. The DRM states:

   The value of each new element is the same as would have been used if the
   stretchy sequence had been created with ``make``, specifying ``size:``
   *new-size* but not ``fill:``.

That is, new elements are the default ``fill:`` value for the collection. This
will be ``#f``, ``0``, or ``' '`` depending on the type of limited
collection. But in a user-defined limited collection, such as
``limited(<vector>, of: <shape>)``, the default causes a spurious type error.
And if the collection is empty, the workaround described in the DRM of using
the first element of the collection cannot be used.

This DEP solves that problem by describing a way for ``size-setter`` to
populate a collection with valid values. This DEP also improves the
interface/implementation separation of limited collections by allowing a
library author to specify a valid default for ``fill:`` in a type-defining
``limited`` call rather than requiring the client to know and use a valid
``fill:`` value in every call to ``make``.

Additionally, this DEP adds the ``element-type`` method. This method is useful
for code that transforms or manipulates one collection into a different form.
The example of the ``<stream>`` classes comes to mind. If you write code that
maps a stream to or from a user-supplied collection, that code cannot verify
compatibility between the stream's ``stream-element-type`` and the collection's
element type. Adding the ``element-type`` method solves that problem.


Rationale
=========

I named ``element-type-fill`` as such rather than ``default-fill`` because the
latter name is a little more misleading. A user can define a subclass of a
collection and provide a new default value for the ``fill:`` init-keyword
without needing to define a new ``element-type-fill`` method; he only needs to
do that when restricting the element type of a collection.

The ``element-type-fill`` and ``element-type`` methods take an *instance* of a
collection class as an argument rather than the *type* of the collection. This
is necessary because the [DRM]_ allows the ``limited`` function on *C* to
return *C* itself as a type, implying that the default fill and element type
information associated with the limited collection has to be available on a
per-instance basis. Plus, creating getters on types is not idiomatic to Dylan.

A previous draft had changed the behavior of ``map``, etc., so that they would
instantiate their resulting collection with the collection's default fill
value. This turned out to be problematic. Most limited collections used in the
Open Dylan source code do not have a ``false-or`` element type, and the element
type they do have lacks a sensible "blank" value such as ``#f``, ``0``, or
``""`` to use as a default fill. Strictly speaking, such a collection is poorly
formed because it can never be directly instantiated with a specific size;
however, that situation never occurs in the Open Dylan source code. Instead,
the source code instantiates such a collection indirectly via ``map`` or
``as``. Those functions fill the collection with a value derived from the first
element of the argument(s), as described by the DRM's note to implementors
quoted above. The value is not the "correct" value for any element but the
first, but of course each other element is given its own "correct" value
immediately thereafter, with the fill value merely acting as a placeholder.
Under the previous draft this fill behavior would have been removed and all
those limited collections would have needed to be changed; in order to tolerate
being instantiated "empty", they would have needed a ``false-or`` element type.
That would have been a significant lapse in backwards compatibility with the
Open Dylan source code and presumably with other source code as well.
Therefore, I revised this DEP to leave ``map``, etc., functioning as they
always have. Those "poorly-formed" limited collections are still poorly formed,
but…they work in their environment.

I had originally considered a more extensive change where each instance of a
fillable collection class would not only track its *default* fill value, but
also track the *specific* ``fill:`` value that it was created with. But in
thinking about it, I feel the designers made the right call in leaving that
information out of each instance. In particular, the implementation of
``<list>`` would be difficult if each instance tracked its ``fill:`` value.


Implementation Notes
--------------------

``element-type``
''''''''''''''''

The Open Dylan implementation already defines this internally. The name just
needs to be exported.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This DEP does not change the limited collection type relationships described in
the `Limited Collection Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Limited_Collection_Types>`__
section of the [DRM]_.

Before this DEP, the Open Dylan implementation of limited collections
effectively specified a ``default-fill:`` argument for certain combinations of
collection and element type, as follows:

=====================  =====================================================
Collection             Element Types     
=====================  =====================================================
``<array>``            ``<byte>``, ``<double-byte>``, ``<machine-word>``,
                       ``<integer>``, ``<single-float>``, ``<double-float>``
``<vector>``           ``<byte>``, ``<double-byte>``, ``<machine-word>``,
                       ``<integer>``, ``<single-float>``, ``<double-float>``
``<stretchy-vector>``  ``<byte>``, ``<byte-character>``
=====================  =====================================================

Programs that relied on this behavior should instead specify either the
``default-fill:`` argument to ``limited`` or the ``fill:`` init-keyword to 
``make``.

Existing subclasses of ``<collection>`` that define their own ``fill:``
init-keyword will still work, assuming they also specify a default value for
that keyword that is of the element type of the subclass.

New code may use ``element-type`` or ``element-type-fill`` in conjunction with
an existing subclass of ``<collection>`` that does not define those methods but
nonetheless has restricted element types. ``element-type`` and
``element-type-fill`` will then return ``<object>`` and ``#f``, which may not
be correct for that collection's allowed element types.

The only other backwards compatibility issue is a namespace collision if the
user defines his own unrelated "element-type" or "element-type-fill" bindings.


Reference Implementation
========================

The reference implementation includes the following implementation-specified
behavior:

   * ``limited(<string>, …)`` returns a ``limited(<byte-string>, …)``.
   * ``element-type-fill`` on an instance of a non-fillable collection class
     returns ``#f`` (as opposed to signaling an error).

The reference implementation currently includes an ``element-type-fill`` slot
in every instance of a ``<simple-T-X>`` class (e.g. ``<simple-byte-vector>``).
Ideally, the ``<simple-T-X>`` class would hard code a common
``element-type-fill`` value like ``0`` or ``' '``, and an additional subclass
``<simple-T-X-with-fill>`` would include the ``element-type-fill`` slot if the
user wants a more unusual fill value. Unfortunately, it appears that the
implementation of repeated slots does not allow for subclasses of a class with
repeated slots.

A possible remedy is to implement two subclasses of a ``<simple-T-X>`` class:
``<simple-T-X-common-fill>`` and ``<simple-T-X-custom-fill>``. ``<simple-T-X>``
would become abstract and the two concrete subclasses would define the repeated
slot. The code specifically allows for this in the ``dfmc-modeling`` module's
``limited-element-type-mappings-definer`` macro; it can return a different
concrete class depending on the ``default-fill:`` argument to ``limited``.

.. [DRM] `Dylan Reference Manual`:title-reference:
