******************
Multi-line Strings
******************

===============  =============================================
DEP #:           8
Type:            Standards Track
Affects-DRM:     Yes
Author:          Carl Gay
Status:          Draft
Created:         16-Feb-2015
Last-Modified:   16-Feb-2015
Post-History:    16-Feb-2015 hackers@lists.opendylan.org
Target-Version:  2014.2
===============  =============================================

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

Dylan currently has no way to encode multi-line strings into a single source
token that crosses multiple source lines.  This DEP proposes a literal syntax
for multi-line strings.


Rationale
=========

While it should be noted that encoding long string literals into source code is
not good practice when internationalization is desired, it is convenient to
have this ability for quick scripts and especially for encoding test data.
Most modern programming languages provide this ability.

For very short multi-line strings one can get away with using \\n or
\\r\\n in a regular string::

  "line one\nline two"

but readability quickly suffers as these strings get longer.  An alternative is
to put one string on each line and rely on automatic string concatenation by
the compiler::

  "line one\n"
  "line two"

The problem here is that changing the contents of the string quickly becomes an
editing chore as you attempt to keep the lines similar length and remember to
put the \\n at the end.  Having a multi-line string literal syntax would
alleviate both of these problems.


Specification
=============

Multi-line string literals are delimited by three double quote characters on
each end.  The BNF, which augments the `Character and String Literals
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Lexical_Grammar#HEADING-117-38>`_ section in
the DRM, is ::

  MULTI-LINE-STRING:

      """ more-multi-line-string

  MORE-MULTI-LINE-STRING:

      multi-line-string-character more-multi-line-string

      """

  MULTI-LINE-STRING-CHARACTER:

      any printing character (including space) except for \\

      \\ escape-character

Escape characters are interpreted as with the standard STRING production.
Literal end-of-line sequences (\\n and \\r\\n) are always interpreted as a
single newline character, regardless of operating system platform.

Examples:

Equivalent to ``"abc"``::

  """abc"""

Equivalent to ``"line one\nline two"``::

  """line one
  line two"""

Equivalent to ``"let x = \"foo\";"``::

  """let x = "foo";"""

Equivalent to ``"\nfoo\nbar\n"``::

  """
  foo
  bar
  """


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation can be found `on github
<https://github.com/cgay/opendylan/commits/multi-line-strings>`_.  As of this
writing, the implementation is functional but needs a few internal cleanups.


Open Issues
===========

This proposal currently has no provision for string literals in which there
is no escape sequence interpretation, i.e. "raw" strings.



Revision History
================

The revision history of this document is available here:
https://github.com/dylan-lang/website/commits/master/source/proposals/dep-0008.rst
