documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0002.rst, before:

Define Function
===============

==============  =============================================
DEP #:          2
Type:           Standards Track
Author:         Bill Chiles
Status:         Accepted
Created:        26-Jan-1996
Post-History:   None
==============  =============================================

*Note: This DEP was converted from the old Dylan Change Proposal
Format to DEP format with minimal changes for ReStructuredText.  It
does not fully conform to the new format.*

Specification
=============

   Add a "define function" defining macro that creates a constant
   binding in the current module and initializes it to a new function.
   The new defining macro has the following syntax::

      DEFINE { adjective }* FUNCTION name parameter-list
        [ body ] 
      END [ FUNCTION ] [ name ]

   The adjectives allowed are implementation dependent.  The parameter
   list describes the number and types of the arguments that the
   function accepts, and the number and types of the values it returns.
   It is an error to supply #next in the parameter list, and there is
   no implicit #next parameter.

   Using reflective operations on "define function" functions:

      (1) For the following functions an implementation may choose to 
          return a meaningful result (or perform a meaningful side-effect
          operation), or the implementation may signal an error::

            generic-function-methods, add-method, find-method, 
            generic-function-mandatory-keywords, remove-method, 
            sorted-applicable-methods, applicable-method?

          Note, the error signalled might not be a <sealed-object-error>,
          and this implementation choice holds for a "define function"
          function that is passed as either argument to add-method and
          remove-method.

      (2) The following functions return the same values as they would 
          for a bare method defined with the same signature::

            function-specializers, function-arguments, 
            function-return-values 

   "Define function" could be added either to the core language or to a
   library.

Rationale
=========

   Many programmers desire a way to define a function that clearly
   says to other programmers that the function is not part of any
   generic operation; furthermore, the function won't be extended as a
   generic function, and calling it need not involve any generic
   dispatch.  The two main choices in current practice are::

     define constant cube = method (x) x * x * x end;

     define method cube (x) x * x * x end;

   The first choice is clumsy because it makes it hard to distinguish
   function constants from non-function constants.  The second choice
   does not make it clear that this is the only method for the
   function.  The "define function" proposal gives everybody one
   simple way to express their intent.  The expansion of the macro is
   left unspecified so that Dylan implementations have latitude to
   support it in the best way suited to the implementation.

   This proposal defines the behavior of applicable-method? when called 
   on "define function" functions based on new wording that describes
   applicable-method? in the DRM.

Examples
========

   An example use::

     define function cube (x) x * x * x end;

   Below is one possible implementation of the macro.  This implementation
   supports whatever adjectives are supported by "define constant".
   Other implementations are possible.  ::

     define macro function-definer
         { define ?adjectives:* function ?name:name 
              ?signature-and-body:* end }
         => { define ?adjectives constant ?name = method 
              ?signature-and-body end }
     end macro function-definer;

Cost to Implementors
====================

   The cost is very little, essentially a macro definition and exporting
   the identifier for the macro.  An implementation may also want to
   annotate the function's name in the compiler's database to indicate
   that the function should not be extended (or added to a generic
   function if it is a method), signalling appropriate errors or
   protecting compiler optimizations based on assumptions about the
   function.

Revision History
================
::

   Version 1; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 26 JAN 96.
      Initial proposal with input from a few people.
   Version 2; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 01 FEB 96.
      New specification of reflective operations on functions.
      Replaces rationale text for the specification of reflective 
         operations with one sentences about applicable-method?.
      Strengthens #next restriction by saying there is no implicit 
         #next argument.
      Removes controversial macro example.
   Version 3; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 08 FEB 96.
      Described "define function" defining macro without reference to 
         "define method".
   Version 4; Harlequin, Inc.; Peter Norvig 13 MAR 96.
      Changed format to meet the new Dylan Change Proposal Format.  
      Added two possible macro implementations.
   Version 5; Kim Barrett 31 Dec 1996
      Removed incorrect example macro definition which used "define method"
      in the expansion.  (Incorrect because it introduces an implicit binding
      of a variable named "next-method" around the body, which is counter to
      the specified contract for this macro.)

Status
======

   Accepted 31 December 1996

Commit message:

Use code-blocks in DEP-0002.

documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0002.rst, after:

Define Function
===============

==============  =============================================
DEP #:          2
Type:           Standards Track
Author:         Bill Chiles
Status:         Accepted
Created:        26-Jan-1996
Post-History:   None
==============  =============================================

*Note: This DEP was converted from the old Dylan Change Proposal
Format to DEP format with minimal changes for ReStructuredText.  It
does not fully conform to the new format.*

Specification
=============

   Add a "define function" defining macro that creates a constant
   binding in the current module and initializes it to a new function.
   The new defining macro has the following syntax::

      DEFINE { adjective }* FUNCTION name parameter-list
        [ body ] 
      END [ FUNCTION ] [ name ]

   The adjectives allowed are implementation dependent.  The parameter
   list describes the number and types of the arguments that the
   function accepts, and the number and types of the values it returns.
   It is an error to supply #next in the parameter list, and there is
   no implicit #next parameter.

   Using reflective operations on "define function" functions:

      (1) For the following functions an implementation may choose to 
          return a meaningful result (or perform a meaningful side-effect
          operation), or the implementation may signal an error::

            generic-function-methods, add-method, find-method, 
            generic-function-mandatory-keywords, remove-method, 
            sorted-applicable-methods, applicable-method?

          Note, the error signalled might not be a <sealed-object-error>,
          and this implementation choice holds for a "define function"
          function that is passed as either argument to add-method and
          remove-method.

      (2) The following functions return the same values as they would 
          for a bare method defined with the same signature::

            function-specializers, function-arguments, 
            function-return-values 

   "Define function" could be added either to the core language or to a
   library.

Rationale
=========

   Many programmers desire a way to define a function that clearly
   says to other programmers that the function is not part of any
   generic operation; furthermore, the function won't be extended as a
   generic function, and calling it need not involve any generic
   dispatch.  The two main choices in current practice are:

   .. code-block:: dylan

     define constant cube = method (x) x * x * x end;

     define method cube (x) x * x * x end;

   The first choice is clumsy because it makes it hard to distinguish
   function constants from non-function constants.  The second choice
   does not make it clear that this is the only method for the
   function.  The "define function" proposal gives everybody one
   simple way to express their intent.  The expansion of the macro is
   left unspecified so that Dylan implementations have latitude to
   support it in the best way suited to the implementation.

   This proposal defines the behavior of applicable-method? when called 
   on "define function" functions based on new wording that describes
   applicable-method? in the DRM.

Examples
========

   An example use:

   .. code-block:: dylan

     define function cube (x) x * x * x end;

   Below is one possible implementation of the macro.  This implementation
   supports whatever adjectives are supported by "define constant".
   Other implementations are possible.

   .. code-block:: dylan

     define macro function-definer
         { define ?adjectives:* function ?name:name 
              ?signature-and-body:* end }
         => { define ?adjectives constant ?name = method 
              ?signature-and-body end }
     end macro function-definer;

Cost to Implementors
====================

   The cost is very little, essentially a macro definition and exporting
   the identifier for the macro.  An implementation may also want to
   annotate the function's name in the compiler's database to indicate
   that the function should not be extended (or added to a generic
   function if it is a method), signalling appropriate errors or
   protecting compiler optimizations based on assumptions about the
   function.

Revision History
================
::

   Version 1; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 26 JAN 96.
      Initial proposal with input from a few people.
   Version 2; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 01 FEB 96.
      New specification of reflective operations on functions.
      Replaces rationale text for the specification of reflective 
         operations with one sentences about applicable-method?.
      Strengthens #next restriction by saying there is no implicit 
         #next argument.
      Removes controversial macro example.
   Version 3; Harlequin, Inc.; Bill Chiles; 08 FEB 96.
      Described "define function" defining macro without reference to 
         "define method".
   Version 4; Harlequin, Inc.; Peter Norvig 13 MAR 96.
      Changed format to meet the new Dylan Change Proposal Format.  
      Added two possible macro implementations.
   Version 5; Kim Barrett 31 Dec 1996
      Removed incorrect example macro definition which used "define method"
      in the expansion.  (Incorrect because it introduces an implicit binding
      of a variable named "next-method" around the body, which is counter to
      the specified contract for this macro.)

Status
======

   Accepted 31 December 1996
