documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0007.rst, before:

*****************************
Type-Safe Limited Collections
*****************************
        
===============  ===============
DEP-Number:      0007
Author:          Dustin Voss
Status:          Draft
Type:            Standards Track
Affects-DRM:     Yes
Created:         28-Jul-2013
Last-Modified:   31-Jul-2013
Post-History:    28-Jul-2013
Target-Version:  2013.2
Requires:        0005
===============  ===============

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

To improve type safety of collections and particularly limited collections,
this DEP adds a ``default-fill:`` keyword argument to limited collection
classes and a ``default-fill`` and ``element-type`` getter to all collections.


Specification
=============

The collection classes that allow a ``fill:`` keyword argument are:

- ``<array>``
- ``<vector>``
- ``<simple-vector>``
- ``<simple-object-vector>``
- ``<stretchy-vector>``
- ``<deque>``
- ``<list>``
- ``<string>``
- ``<byte-string>``
- ``<unicode-string>``

This DEP refers to these classes as *fillable collection classes*. Fillable
collection classes are comprised of all the direct and indirect subclasses of
``<mutable-sequence>`` excepting ``<mutable-sequence>`` itself, ``<pair>``, and
``<empty-list>``.


``limited``
-----------

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes will each add the
following additional parameter:

====================  ==========================================
Class                 Parameter
====================  ==========================================
``<string>``          ``#key default-fill :: <character> = ' '``
``<byte-string>``     ``#key default-fill :: K1 = C1``
``<unicode-string>``  ``#key default-fill :: K2 = C2``
All others            ``#key default-fill :: <object> = #f``
====================  ==========================================

*K1* and *K2* are unspecified subclasses of ``<character>``. *C1* and *C2* are
unspecified values equivalent to a space character.

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes each return a limited
type designated *L*. The ``fill:`` init-keyword of all *L* will have a default
value of ``default-fill(L)`` instead of ``#f``.

The defaulted or supplied ``default-fill:`` argument must be an instance of the
element type of the collection class; it is an error to supply a default filler
object that the collection cannot accommodate.


``default-fill``
----------------

A new generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   default-fill (type :: subclass(<collection>)) => (fill-object :: <object>)

For fillable collection classes returned by ``limited``, this function will
return the (possibly defaulted) ``default-fill:`` argument to ``limited``. For
all other collection classes, this function will return the following:

====================  ============  
Class                 Return Value
====================  ============  
``<string>``          ``' '``
``<byte-string>``     C1
``<unicode-string>``  C2
``<range>``           ``0``
All others            ``#f``
====================  ============  

*C1* and *C2* are unspecified values equivalent to a space character.


``element-type``
----------------

A new generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   element-type (type :: subclass(<collection>)) => (element-type :: <type>)

For collection classes with a limited element type, this function will return
that element type. For other collection classes, this function will return the
element type described in
`Element Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Element_Types>`__ of the [DRM]_.


``map``, ``map-as``, etc.
-------------------------

Every function that uses the first value of an existing collection as the
filler element in a newly instantiated collection will use the ``default-fill``
value of the existing collection class instead.


``<collection>``
----------------

To support the above changes to ``map``, etc., ``fill:`` will be a valid
initialization argument for all ``<collection>`` classes, as defined in the
`Overview <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Instance_Creation_and_Initialization#HEADING-43-2>`__
subsection of "Instance Creation and Initialization" in the [DRM]_. This does
not imply that the initialization argument will be *used* by all
``<collection>`` classes; this just means that any call to ``make`` on a
collection class may include an initialization argument like ``fill:
c.default-fill`` without causing a spurious error.

This initialization argument will be specialized as the ``element-type`` of the
collection. That is, for the non-fillable collection classes (those that did
not already specify a ``fill:`` init-keyword), the keyword will be specialized
as follows:

===========  ==============
Class        Specialization
===========  ==============
``<range>``  ``<real>``
All others   ``<object>``
===========  ==============


Motivation
==========

The second paragraph of the 
`Collection Operations <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Collection_Operations>`__
section of the [DRM]_ states the following:

   Note to implementors: Functions such as ``map``, ``map-as`` that return a
   new collection cannot rely on the type they instantiate having a valid
   default for ``fill:``. Therefore, when the size of the result is nonzero,
   these functions should compute the first element of the result before making
   the collection and specify that element as the ``fill:`` value. Otherwise a
   spurious type error could occur when making the collection.
   
However, there is a problem with the ``size-setter`` method that is not
addressed by the above note. That method may be called on an empty collection
to grow it. The DRM states:

   The value of each new element is the same as would have been used if the
   stretchy sequence had been created with ``make``, specifying ``size:``
   *new-size* but not ``fill:``.

That is, new elements are the default ``fill:`` value for the collection. This
will be to ``#f``, ``0``, or ``' '`` depending on the type of limited
collection. But in a user-defined limited collection, such as
``limited(<vector>, of: <shape>)``, the default causes a spurious type error.
And if the collection is empty, the workaround described in the DRM of using
the first element of the collection cannot be used.

This DEP solves both problems. It describes a way for a collection type to
specify a valid default for ``fill:`` providing a superior alternative to the
workaround described in the DRM's note to implementors, and also describes a
way for ``size-setter`` to populate a collection with valid values.

Additionally, this DEP adds the ``element-type`` method. This method is useful
for code that transforms or manipulates one collection into a different form.
The example of the ``<stream>`` classes comes to mind. If you write code that
maps a stream to or from a user-supplied collection, that code cannot verify
compatibility between the stream's ``stream-element-type`` and the collection's
element type. Adding the ``element-type`` method solves that problem.


Rationale
=========

This DEP does not add the default fill information to *instances* of collection
classes, but only adds it to the *type*. I had originally considered a more
extensive change where each instance of a fillable collection class would track
the ``fill:`` value that it was created with, but in thinking about it, I feel
the designers made the right call in leaving that information out of each
instance. In particular, the implementation of ``<list>`` would be difficult if
each instance tracked its ``fill:`` value.

In an earlier unpublished draft, I had also specified that the ``default-fill``
method only be defined for *L*. But in rereading the [DRM]_ note reproduced
above, I was reminded that ``map``, etc., would need to call ``default-fill``
to do its job properly. Since ``map`` is defined as *function* on
``<collection>`` rather than a generic method, ``default-fill`` would need to
be applicable to all collections, and ``fill:`` would likewise need to be a
valid init-argument to all collections, or else ``map``, etc., would need to
distinguish between fillable and non-fillable collections internally. I opted
for the simpler model of treating all collections as fillable for instantiation
purposes.


Implementation Notes
--------------------

``default-fill``
''''''''''''''''

There is an optimization opportunity here to minimize the run-time impact of
the ``default-fill`` method (already minimal). Since ``default-fill`` is saved
on a per-type basis rather than a per-instance basis, its value may be known at
compile time, allowing it to be inlined as a constant.


``element-type``
''''''''''''''''

The Open Dylan implementation already defines this internally. The name just
needs to be exported.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This DEP does not change the limited collection type relationships described in
the `Limited Collection Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Limited_Collection_Types>`__
section of the [DRM]_.

The default value of the new ``default-fill:`` parameter to ``limited`` is the
same as the previously hard-coded default value of the ``fill:`` init-parameter
to the fillable collection classes. Therefore, code that calls ``limited``
without the ``default-fill:`` argument will get a type whose default ``fill:``
value is the same as the ``fill:`` value in current versions of Open Dylan.

Existing code that relies on the first element being used as a new collection's
fill value will probably behave differently. This sort of code seems unlikely to
exist.

Existing code that uses the first element as a new collection's fill value will
work as before, but will not longer be consistent with the behavior of ``map``,
etc.

Existing subclasses of ``<collection>`` that define their own ``fill:``
init-keyword will still work. The exception is a subclass of ``<range>`` that
defines a ``fill:`` init-keyword specialized to something other than
``<real>``. In this case, the compiler will correctly report an error, since
the element type of ``<range>`` is ``<real>`` and the filler element has to be
of legal element type.

The only other backwards compatibility issue is a namespace collision if the
user defines his own unrelated "element-type" or "default-fill" bindings.


Reference Implementation
========================

I believe the only difficult part of implementing this DEP is updating the
collection functions to instantiate new collections with the ``fill:
c.default-fill`` argument. There are a lot of collection functions, but it
should be easy to determine which calls to ``make`` instantiate new collections
(as opposed to some other internal task).


.. [DRM] `Dylan Reference Manual`:title-reference:

Commit message:

Changed specification of element-type and default-fill generic functions to take an instance of a collection class, not an instance of a <type>, as their arguments, for DRM compatibility.

documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0007.rst, after:

*****************************
Type-Safe Limited Collections
*****************************
        
===============  ===============
DEP-Number:      0007
Author:          Dustin Voss
Status:          Draft
Type:            Standards Track
Affects-DRM:     Yes
Created:         28-Jul-2013
Last-Modified:   06-Aug-2013
Post-History:    28-Jul-2013
Target-Version:  2013.2
Requires:        0005
===============  ===============

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

To improve type safety of collections and particularly limited collections,
this DEP adds a ``default-fill:`` keyword argument to limited collection
classes and a ``default-fill`` and ``element-type`` getter to all collections.


Specification
=============

The collection classes that allow a ``fill:`` keyword argument are:

- ``<array>``
- ``<vector>``
- ``<simple-vector>``
- ``<simple-object-vector>``
- ``<stretchy-vector>``
- ``<deque>``
- ``<list>``
- ``<string>``
- ``<byte-string>``
- ``<unicode-string>``

This DEP refers to these classes as *fillable collection classes*. Fillable
collection classes are comprised of all the direct and indirect subclasses of
``<mutable-sequence>`` excepting ``<mutable-sequence>`` itself, ``<pair>``, and
``<empty-list>``.


``limited``
-----------

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes will each add the
following additional parameter:

====================  ==========================================
Class                 Parameter
====================  ==========================================
``<string>``          ``#key default-fill :: <character> = ' '``
``<byte-string>``     ``#key default-fill :: K1 = C1``
``<unicode-string>``  ``#key default-fill :: K2 = C2``
All others            ``#key default-fill :: <object> = #f``
====================  ==========================================

*K1* and *K2* are unspecified subclasses of ``<character>``. *C1* and *C2* are
unspecified values equivalent to a space character.

The ``limited`` methods on fillable collection classes each return a limited
type designated *L*. The ``fill:`` init-keyword of all *L* will have a default
value identical to the default value listed above instead of ``#f``.

The defaulted or supplied ``default-fill:`` argument must be an instance of the
element type of the collection; it is an error to supply a default filler
object that the collection cannot accommodate.


``default-fill``
----------------

A new generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   default-fill (coll :: <collection>) => (fill-object :: <object>)

For instances of fillable collection classes returned by ``limited``, this
function will return the (possibly defaulted) ``default-fill:`` argument to
``limited``. For instances of all other collection classes, this function will
return the following:

====================  ============  
Class                 Return Value
====================  ============  
``<string>``          ``' '``
``<byte-string>``     C1
``<unicode-string>``  C2
``<range>``           ``0``
All others            ``#f``
====================  ============  

*C1* and *C2* are unspecified values equivalent to a space character.


``element-type``
----------------

A new generic function will be added to the Dylan library::

   element-type (coll :: <collection>) => (element-type :: <type>)

For instances of collection classes with a limited element type, this function
will return that element type. For instances of other collection classes, this
function will return the element type described in
`Element Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Element_Types>`__ of the [DRM]_.


``map``, ``map-as``, etc.
-------------------------

Every function that uses the first value of an existing collection as the
filler element in a newly instantiated collection will use the ``default-fill``
value of the existing collection instead.


``<collection>``
----------------

To support the above changes to ``map``, etc., ``fill:`` will be a valid
initialization argument for all ``<collection>`` classes, as defined in the
`Overview <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Instance_Creation_and_Initialization#HEADING-43-2>`__
subsection of "Instance Creation and Initialization" in the [DRM]_. This does
not imply that the initialization argument will be *used* by all
``<collection>`` classes; this just means that any call to ``make`` on a
collection class may include an initialization argument like ``fill:
c.default-fill`` without causing a spurious error.

This initialization argument will be specialized as the ``element-type`` of the
collection. That is, for the non-fillable collection classes (those that did
not already specify a ``fill:`` init-keyword), the keyword will be specialized
as follows:

===========  ==============
Class        Specialization
===========  ==============
``<range>``  ``<real>``
All others   ``<object>``
===========  ==============


Motivation
==========

The second paragraph of the 
`Collection Operations <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Collection_Operations>`__
section of the [DRM]_ states the following:

   Note to implementors: Functions such as ``map``, ``map-as`` that return a
   new collection cannot rely on the type they instantiate having a valid
   default for ``fill:``. Therefore, when the size of the result is nonzero,
   these functions should compute the first element of the result before making
   the collection and specify that element as the ``fill:`` value. Otherwise a
   spurious type error could occur when making the collection.
   
However, there is a problem with the ``size-setter`` method that is not
addressed by the above note. That method may be called on an empty collection
to grow it. The DRM states:

   The value of each new element is the same as would have been used if the
   stretchy sequence had been created with ``make``, specifying ``size:``
   *new-size* but not ``fill:``.

That is, new elements are the default ``fill:`` value for the collection. This
will be to ``#f``, ``0``, or ``' '`` depending on the type of limited
collection. But in a user-defined limited collection, such as
``limited(<vector>, of: <shape>)``, the default causes a spurious type error.
And if the collection is empty, the workaround described in the DRM of using
the first element of the collection cannot be used.

This DEP solves both problems. It describes a way for a collection type to
specify a valid default for ``fill:`` providing a superior alternative to the
workaround described in the DRM's note to implementors, and also describes a
way for ``size-setter`` to populate a collection with valid values.

Additionally, this DEP adds the ``element-type`` method. This method is useful
for code that transforms or manipulates one collection into a different form.
The example of the ``<stream>`` classes comes to mind. If you write code that
maps a stream to or from a user-supplied collection, that code cannot verify
compatibility between the stream's ``stream-element-type`` and the collection's
element type. Adding the ``element-type`` method solves that problem.


Rationale
=========

The ``default-fill`` and ``element-type`` methods take an *instance* of a
collection class as an argument rather than the *type* of the collection. This
is necessary because the [DRM]_ allows the ``limited`` function on *C* to
return *C* itself as a type, implying that the default fill and element type
information associated with the limited collection has to be available on a
per-instance basis. Plus, creating getters on *types* is not idiomatic to Dylan.

I had originally considered a more extensive change where each instance of a
fillable collection class would not only track its *default* fill value, but
also track the *specific* ``fill:`` value that it was created with. But in
thinking about it, I feel the designers made the right call in leaving that
information out of each instance. In particular, the implementation of
``<list>`` would be difficult if each instance tracked its ``fill:`` value.

In an earlier unpublished draft, I had also specified that the ``default-fill``
method only be defined for *L*. But in rereading the [DRM]_ note reproduced
above, I was reminded that ``map``, etc., would need to call ``default-fill``
to do its job properly. Since ``map`` is defined as *function* on
``<collection>`` rather than a generic method, ``default-fill`` would need to
be applicable to all collections, and ``fill:`` would likewise need to be a
valid init-argument to all collections, or else ``map``, etc., would need to
distinguish between fillable and non-fillable collections internally. I opted
for the simpler model of treating all collections as fillable for instantiation
purposes.


Implementation Notes
--------------------

``element-type``
''''''''''''''''

The Open Dylan implementation already defines this internally. The name just
needs to be exported.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This DEP does not change the limited collection type relationships described in
the `Limited Collection Types <http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Limited_Collection_Types>`__
section of the [DRM]_.

The default value of the new ``default-fill:`` parameter to ``limited`` is the
same as the previously hard-coded default value of the ``fill:`` init-parameter
to the fillable collection classes. Therefore, code that calls ``limited``
without the ``default-fill:`` argument will get a type whose default ``fill:``
value is the same as the ``fill:`` value in current versions of Open Dylan.

Existing code that relies on the first element being used as a new collection's
fill value will probably behave differently. This sort of code seems unlikely to
exist.

Existing code that uses the first element as a new collection's fill value will
work as before, but will not longer be consistent with the behavior of ``map``,
etc.

Existing subclasses of ``<collection>`` that define their own ``fill:``
init-keyword will still work. The exception is a subclass of ``<range>`` that
defines a ``fill:`` init-keyword specialized to something other than
``<real>``. In this case, the compiler will correctly report an error, since
the element type of ``<range>`` is ``<real>`` and the filler element has to be
of legal element type.

The only other backwards compatibility issue is a namespace collision if the
user defines his own unrelated "element-type" or "default-fill" bindings.


Reference Implementation
========================

I believe the only difficult part of implementing this DEP is updating the
collection functions to instantiate new collections with the ``fill:
c.default-fill`` argument. There are a lot of collection functions, but it
should be easy to determine which calls to ``make`` instantiate new collections
(as opposed to some other internal task).


.. [DRM] `Dylan Reference Manual`:title-reference:
