documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0004.rst, before:

*******************
New strings Library
*******************

==============  =============================================
DEP #:          4
Type:           Standards Track
Author:         Carl Gay
Status:         Draft
Created:        08-Apr-2012
Last-Modified:  08-Apr-2012
Post-History:   None
Dylan-Version:  2012.1
==============  =============================================


.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

This proposal is an attempt to provide a simpler, more consistent
strings API than is currently available via string-extensions, that is
available from a single library (and a single module).

Goals
=====

#. Comprehensive string APIs available via the ``strings`` module
   exported from the ``strings`` library.

#. Consistent naming and parameter lists.

#. As simple as possible to use for common tasks.  Strive for the same
   simplicity as Python, for example.

#. Where possible, functions introduced here should be useful when
   applied to standard Dylan mapping functions (map, every?, etc)
   and collection functions (sort, reverse, etc).  In other words
   they should not require currying in order to be used with the
   mapping and collection functions for the most common cases.

#. Replace existing string-extensions module, which will only be
   retained (on GitHub) so as not to break Gwydion Dylan unnecessarily.
   (It could be integrated into GD instead of being a submodule.)


Non Goals
=========

#. Unicode

#. Immutable strings

#. Strings not implemented as subclasses of ``<sequence>``.

#. Text formatting APIs, such as justification and wrapping.

#. Anything that is only applicable to a specific human language,
   such as ``pluralize``.


Proposal
========

Open Dylan currently has a hodge-podge of string manipulation
functionality.  A few functions (concatenate, subsequence-position,
as-lowercase, ...) are built into the ``dylan`` library, some
functions are exported from various modules in the string-extensions
library, and a few in common-dylan.  Some Common Lisp-like strings
functionality has been built into DUIM and Deuce.  This proposal is an
attempt to provide a richer strings API in a single "strings" module.
This is complicated by the fact that some string operations are also
applicable to generalized sequences.

The entire existing "strings" module (mainly used by the http library)
will be replaced by this API.

I first present the entire API and then later discuss it in detail.


API Summary
-----------

Export the following functions from the "strings" module of the
"strings" library.

::

    control?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    printable?    (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    graphic?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphabetic?   (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphanumeric? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    lowercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    uppercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    whitespace? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    decimal-digit?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    octal-digit?        (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    hexadecimal-digit?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    char-equal?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    char-equal-ic?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less-ic?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater-ic?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    string-equal?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-equal-ic?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less-ic?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater-ic? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    starts-with? (string, pattern-string, #key test) => (boolean)
    ends-with?   (string, pattern-string, #key test) => (boolean)

    lowercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)
    lowercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)
    uppercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)
    uppercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)

    strip       (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-left  (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-right (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)

    align-center (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-left   (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-right  (string, width, #key fill = ' ')

    find-substring     (string, pattern, #key start, end, test) => (index-or-#f)
    replace-substrings (string, pattern, new, #key test, count)

    split-lines (string, #rest split-keys) => (strings)

    // For reference, the following functions are available via dylan
    // or common-dylan and, although for general sequences, are
    // often useful for strings as well...

    concatenate(sequence, #rest more-sequences) => (new-sequence)
    join (parts, separator, #key start, end, key, conjunction) => (string)
    replace-elements!(big, predicate, new-value-fn, #key count) => (big)
    replace-subsequence!(big, small, #key start, end) => (big)
    split (string, separator, #key start, end, max, remove-if-empty?) => (strings)

Some observations about this API:

* Because this API provides ``start`` and ``end`` keywords where
  appropriate, it is possible to do string operations within larger
  strings without allocating.

* Some functions, such as starts-with? and ends-with?, are provided
  just for readability, despite being trivial to implement in terms of
  other functions.

* All start/end parameters accept negative values, which means to
  index relative to the end of the string.  I've found this extremely
  useful in Python but I understand it will probably be controvesial
  and would be willing to remove that functionality.

The remainder of this proposal will repeat the above API with
discussion interspersed.


Discussion
----------

::

    control?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    printable?    (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    graphic?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphabetic?   (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphanumeric? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    lowercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    uppercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    whitespace? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    decimal-digit?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    octal-digit?        (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    hexadecimal-digit?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

The methods on ``<character>`` do not have ``start`` and ``end``
parameters for obvious reasons.

The methods on ``<string>`` return true if they would return true for
each character in the string.  The ``<string>`` methods could be
implemented as follows::

    every?(f, copy-sequence(s, start: start, end: _end))

Making these functions work on strings makes the resulting code more
concise than using ``every?`` and ``copy-sequence`` together, and also
more efficient, since no allocation is necessary.  The alternative is
to write your own comparison function (which is the solution we have
now, resulting in multiple implementations) or write a ``for`` loop
inline.


::

    char-equal?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    char-equal-ic?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less-ic?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater-ic?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    string-equal?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-equal-ic?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less-ic?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater-ic? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-compare(string1, string2, #key, start1, end1, start2, end2) => (one-of(-1, 0, 1))

String and character comparisons, both case-sensitive and ignoring
case (\*-ic?).  These default to comparing the entire string but allow
comparing substrings via keyword arguments.

Some might object to the \*-ic? functions on the grounds that a "test"
parameter could be added to the non-\*-ic?  functions
instead.  But consider this type of code, which is likely to be fairly
common::

    sort(seq, test: string-less-ic?)

Instead one would have to write this::

    sort(seq, test: rcurry(string-less?, test: char-equal-ic?))

or worse, if char-equal-ic? is removed on the same grounds::

    sort(seq, test: rcurry(string-less?, test: method (c1, c2)
                                                 as-lowercase(c1) = as-lowercase(c2)
                                               end))

or, the less efficient but more concise::

    sort(seq, test: method (s1, s2) as-lowercase(s1) < as-lowercase(s2) end)

::

    // Included here for completeness
    =  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)
    <  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)
    >  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)

If one doesn't mind allocating memory, the above built-in functions
can be used in place of explicit ``start`` and ``end`` parameters::

    copy-sequence(s1, start: x, end: y) = copy-sequence(s2, start: w, end: z)

::

    lowercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    lowercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    uppercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    uppercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)

The above are provided despite the existence of ``as-uppercase`` and
``as-lowercase`` in the dylan module because they provide ``start``
and ``end`` parameters, which makes them consistent with the rest of
the API.

::

    strip       (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-left  (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-right (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)

Return a copy of ``string`` with characters matching ``test`` removed.
Characters are removed from the left and/or right side of ``string``
until the first character *not* matching ``test`` is found.

::

    align-center (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-left   (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-right  (string, width, #key fill = ' ')

The above return a new string of the given ``width``.  If ``string``
is shorter than ``width``, add the ``fill`` character to the left
and/or right side of the string as appropriate.

Examples::

  align-center("x", 5) => "  x  "
  align-center("x", 4) => "  x " or " x  "    (unspecified)
  align-center("x", 7, fill: '.') => "...x..."

::

    starts-with? (string, pattern) => (boolean)
    ends-with?   (string, pattern) => (boolean)

These common operations are for convenience and readability.

::

    find-substring      (string, pattern-string, #key start, end, test) => (index-or-#f)
    replace-substrings  (string, pattern-string, new, #key test, count)

``find-substring`` is like ``subsequence-position`` except that it
accepts start/end keyword arguments and it only applies to strings.

``replace-substrings`` returns a new string with 

::

    join (sequence, separator, #key start, end, key, conjunction) => (string)
    split (string, separator, #key start, end, max, remove-if-empty?) => (strings)

The above apply to sequences in general, not just strings.  These are
already in common-dylan but are included here for completeness.



Dropped string-extensions Names
-------------------------------

A few names exported from ``string-extensions`` have no equivalent in this
library:

* The ``%parse-string`` module.  This should be moved to
  ``regular-expressions`` if it's needed at all.

* The ``string-hacking`` module.  This includes character sets, and a
  few character utilities.

* The ``string-conversions`` module.  The only names this exports that
  aren't available elsewhere are ``digit-to-integer`` and
  ``integer-to-digit``.  I suggest we put basic conversions like this
  into ``common-dylan`` alongside ``string-to-integer`` et al.

* Two names from the ``substring-search`` module:
  ``make-substring-positioner`` and ``make-substring-replacer``.

Commit message:

Add string-compare to API summary section.  Fix return value for *case!.

documentation/website/source/proposals/dep-0004.rst, after:

*******************
New strings Library
*******************

==============  =============================================
DEP #:          4
Type:           Standards Track
Author:         Carl Gay
Status:         Draft
Created:        08-Apr-2012
Last-Modified:  08-Apr-2012
Post-History:   None
Dylan-Version:  2012.1
==============  =============================================


.. contents:: Contents
   :local:


Abstract
========

This proposal is an attempt to provide a simpler, more consistent
strings API than is currently available via string-extensions, that is
available from a single library (and a single module).

Goals
=====

#. Comprehensive string APIs available via the ``strings`` module
   exported from the ``strings`` library.

#. Consistent naming and parameter lists.

#. As simple as possible to use for common tasks.  Strive for the same
   simplicity as Python, for example.

#. Where possible, functions introduced here should be useful when
   applied to standard Dylan mapping functions (map, every?, etc)
   and collection functions (sort, reverse, etc).  In other words
   they should not require currying in order to be used with the
   mapping and collection functions for the most common cases.

#. Replace existing string-extensions module, which will only be
   retained (on GitHub) so as not to break Gwydion Dylan unnecessarily.
   (It could be integrated into GD instead of being a submodule.)


Non Goals
=========

#. Unicode

#. Immutable strings

#. Strings not implemented as subclasses of ``<sequence>``.

#. Text formatting APIs, such as justification and wrapping.

#. Anything that is only applicable to a specific human language,
   such as ``pluralize``.


Proposal
========

Open Dylan currently has a hodge-podge of string manipulation
functionality.  A few functions (concatenate, subsequence-position,
as-lowercase, ...) are built into the ``dylan`` library, some
functions are exported from various modules in the string-extensions
library, and a few in common-dylan.  Some Common Lisp-like strings
functionality has been built into DUIM and Deuce.  This proposal is an
attempt to provide a richer strings API in a single "strings" module.
This is complicated by the fact that some string operations are also
applicable to generalized sequences.

The entire existing "strings" module (mainly used by the http library)
will be replaced by this API.

I first present the entire API and then later discuss it in detail.


API Summary
-----------

Export the following functions from the "strings" module of the
"strings" library.

::

    control?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    printable?    (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    graphic?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphabetic?   (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphanumeric? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    lowercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    uppercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    whitespace? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    decimal-digit?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    octal-digit?        (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    hexadecimal-digit?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    char-equal?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    char-equal-ic?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less-ic?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater-ic?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    string-equal?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-equal-ic?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less-ic?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater-ic? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-compare(string1, string2, #key, start1, end1, start2, end2) => (one-of(-1, 0, 1))

    starts-with? (string, pattern-string, #key test) => (boolean)
    ends-with?   (string, pattern-string, #key test) => (boolean)

    lowercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    lowercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)
    uppercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    uppercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (char-or-string)

    strip       (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-left  (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-right (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)

    align-center (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-left   (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-right  (string, width, #key fill = ' ')

    find-substring     (string, pattern, #key start, end, test) => (index-or-#f)
    replace-substrings (string, pattern, new, #key test, count)

    split-lines (string, #rest split-keys) => (strings)

    // For reference, the following functions are available via dylan
    // or common-dylan and, although for general sequences, are
    // often useful for strings as well...

    concatenate(sequence, #rest more-sequences) => (new-sequence)
    join (parts, separator, #key start, end, key, conjunction) => (string)
    replace-elements!(big, predicate, new-value-fn, #key count) => (big)
    replace-subsequence!(big, small, #key start, end) => (big)
    split (string, separator, #key start, end, max, remove-if-empty?) => (strings)

Some observations about this API:

* Because this API provides ``start`` and ``end`` keywords where
  appropriate, it is possible to do string operations within larger
  strings without allocating.

* Some functions, such as starts-with? and ends-with?, are provided
  just for readability, despite being trivial to implement in terms of
  other functions.

* All start/end parameters accept negative values, which means to
  index relative to the end of the string.  I've found this extremely
  useful in Python but I understand it will probably be controvesial
  and would be willing to remove that functionality.

The remainder of this proposal will repeat the above API with
discussion interspersed.


Discussion
----------

::

    control?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    printable?    (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    graphic?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphabetic?   (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    alphanumeric? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    lowercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    uppercase?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    whitespace? (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

    decimal-digit?      (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    octal-digit?        (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)
    hexadecimal-digit?  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (boolean)

The methods on ``<character>`` do not have ``start`` and ``end``
parameters for obvious reasons.

The methods on ``<string>`` return true if they would return true for
each character in the string.  The ``<string>`` methods could be
implemented as follows::

    every?(f, copy-sequence(s, start: start, end: _end))

Making these functions work on strings makes the resulting code more
concise than using ``every?`` and ``copy-sequence`` together, and also
more efficient, since no allocation is necessary.  The alternative is
to write your own comparison function (which is the solution we have
now, resulting in multiple implementations) or write a ``for`` loop
inline.


::

    char-equal?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    char-equal-ic?    (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-less-ic?     (char1, char2) => (boolean)
    char-greater-ic?  (char1, char2) => (boolean)

    string-equal?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-equal-ic?   (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-less-ic?    (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)
    string-greater-ic? (string1, string2, #key start1, end1, start2, end2) => (boolean)

    string-compare(string1, string2, #key, start1, end1, start2, end2) => (one-of(-1, 0, 1))

String and character comparisons, both case-sensitive and ignoring
case (\*-ic?).  These default to comparing the entire string but allow
comparing substrings via keyword arguments.

``string-compare`` returns -1 if *string1* is less than *string2*, 0
if the strings are equal, and 1 if *string1* is greater than
*string2*.

Some might object to the \*-ic? functions on the grounds that a "test"
parameter could be added to the non-\*-ic?  functions
instead.  But consider this type of code, which is likely to be fairly
common::

    sort(seq, test: string-less-ic?)

Instead one would have to write this::

    sort(seq, test: rcurry(string-less?, test: char-equal-ic?))

or worse, if char-equal-ic? is removed on the same grounds::

    sort(seq, test: rcurry(string-less?, test: method (c1, c2)
                                                 as-lowercase(c1) = as-lowercase(c2)
                                               end))

or, the less efficient but more concise::

    sort(seq, test: method (s1, s2) as-lowercase(s1) < as-lowercase(s2) end)

::

    // Included here for completeness
    =  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)
    <  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)
    >  (char-or-string, char-or-string) => (boolean)

If one doesn't mind allocating memory, the above built-in functions
can be used in place of explicit ``start`` and ``end`` parameters::

    copy-sequence(s1, start: x, end: y) = copy-sequence(s2, start: w, end: z)

::

    lowercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    lowercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    uppercase  (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)
    uppercase! (char-or-string, #key start, end) => (new-char-or-string)

The above are provided despite the existence of ``as-uppercase`` and
``as-lowercase`` in the dylan module because they provide ``start``
and ``end`` parameters, which makes them consistent with the rest of
the API.

::

    strip       (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-left  (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)
    strip-right (string, #key test = whitespace?) => (new-string)

Return a copy of ``string`` with characters matching ``test`` removed.
Characters are removed from the left and/or right side of ``string``
until the first character *not* matching ``test`` is found.

::

    align-center (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-left   (string, width, #key fill = ' ')
    align-right  (string, width, #key fill = ' ')

The above return a new string of the given ``width``.  If ``string``
is shorter than ``width``, add the ``fill`` character to the left
and/or right side of the string as appropriate.

Examples::

  align-center("x", 5) => "  x  "
  align-center("x", 4) => "  x " or " x  "    (unspecified)
  align-center("x", 7, fill: '.') => "...x..."

::

    starts-with? (string, pattern) => (boolean)
    ends-with?   (string, pattern) => (boolean)

These common operations are for convenience and readability.

::

    find-substring      (string, pattern-string, #key start, end, test) => (index-or-#f)
    replace-substrings  (string, pattern-string, new, #key test, count)

``find-substring`` is like ``subsequence-position`` except that it
accepts start/end keyword arguments and it only applies to strings.

``replace-substrings`` returns a new string with 

::

    join (sequence, separator, #key start, end, key, conjunction) => (string)
    split (string, separator, #key start, end, max, remove-if-empty?) => (strings)

The above apply to sequences in general, not just strings.  These are
already in common-dylan but are included here for completeness.



Dropped string-extensions Names
-------------------------------

A few names exported from ``string-extensions`` have no equivalent in this
library:

* The ``%parse-string`` module.  This should be moved to
  ``regular-expressions`` if it's needed at all.

* The ``string-hacking`` module.  This includes character sets, and a
  few character utilities.

* The ``string-conversions`` module.  The only names this exports that
  aren't available elsewhere are ``digit-to-integer`` and
  ``integer-to-digit``.  I suggest we put basic conversions like this
  into ``common-dylan`` alongside ``string-to-integer`` et al.

* Two names from the ``substring-search`` module:
  ``make-substring-positioner`` and ``make-substring-replacer``.
