***************************
C3 superclass linearization
***************************

==============  =============================================
DEP #:          3
Type:           Standards Track
Affects-DRM:    Yes
Author:         Hannes Mehnert
Status:         Draft
Created:        09-Jan-2012
Last-Modified:  09-Jan-2012
Post-History:   09-Jan-2012
==============  =============================================


Abstract
========

The Dylan superclass linearization is sometimes counter-intuitive. The
C3 superclass linearization algorithm is more intuitive and allows for
greater optimization.

Copyright
=========

This DEP is public domain.

Specification
=============

The C3 superclass linearization has been proposed in 1996 by Kim
Barrett, Bob Cassels, Paul Haahr, David A. Moon, Keith Playford, and
P. Tucker Withington in a `paper
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/236337.236343>`_ (`html version
<http://www.webcom.com/haahr/dylan/linearization-oopsla96.html>`_).

A superclass linearization (also known as a class precedence list) is
used for resolving conflicts among multiply-inherited superclasses
which provide differing definitions of the same method.

Unfortunately the algorithm presented in the Dylan Reference Manual
(`computing the class precedence list
<http://opendylan.org/books/drm/Classes#HEADING-41-25>`_) is not
consistent with the extended precedence graph, and may lead to
counter-intuitive linearizations. To fix that, the C3 linearization
was developed.

Motivation
==========

In order to allow for more optimizations, especially compression of
dispatch tables, which requires monotonicity of method orderings, a
consistent superclass linearization algorithm is needed.

After the C3 linearization was proposed in 1996, it was subsequently
adapted in Python 2.3 (`article <http://www.python.org/download/releases/2.3/mro/>`__)
and Perl 6 (`article
<http://use.perl.org/~autrijus/journal/25768>`__).

Rationale
=========

The C3 linearization has been around for a long time, does not break
any existing code, and is commonly agreed upon as being the right thing
to do (in mailing list discussions).

Examples
========

The example from the paper is given here, consider the following Dylan classes:

.. code-block:: dylan

    define class <pane> (<object>) end;
    define class <scrolling-mixin> (<object>) end;
    define class <editing-mixin> (<object>) end;
    define class <scrollable-pane> (<pane>, <scrolling-mixin>) end;
    define class <editable-pane> (<pane>, <editing-mixin>) end;
    define class <editable-scrollable-pane> (<scrollable-pane>, <editable-pane>) end;


The Dylan linearization is:

.. code-block:: dylan

    <editable-scrollable-pane>, <scrollable-pane>, <editable-pane>, <pane>, <editing-mixin>, <scrolling-mixin>, <object>

The C3 linearization is:

.. code-block:: dylan

    <editable-scrollable-pane>, <scrollable-pane>, <editable-pane>, <pane>, <scrolling-mixin>, <editing-mixin>, <object>

The difference in the ordering of ``<scrolling-mixin>`` and
``<editing-mixin>`` and having that match the ordering of
``<scrollable-pane>`` and ``<editable-pane>`` is clearly
more intuitive and consistent.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

In the first release a serious warning will be issued for superclass
linearization which changed, in subsequent releases a warning should
be issued (depending on a strict compatibility to DRM switch).

Experiments show that there are some differences in existing code; we
found so far three, two of them in duim-gadgets, one in
win32-duim. According to Scott McKay, the author of DUIM, the first
two look better when C3 is used (`mailing list post
<https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/hackers/2012-January/006309.html>`_). The
latter does not alter behaviour (`post
<https://lists.opendylan.org/pipermail/hackers/2012-January/006310.html>`_).

The class precedence list of <row-splitter-pane> differ, Dylan:
    #(<row-splitter-pane>, <row-splitter>, <splitter>, <single-child-wrapping-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <wrapping-layout-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>); 
C3:
    #(<row-splitter-pane>, <row-splitter>, <splitter>, <single-child-wrapping-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <wrapping-layout-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>)


The class precedence list of <column-splitter-pane> differ, Dylan:
    #(<column-splitter-pane>, <column-splitter>, <splitter>, <single-child-wrapping-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <wrapping-layout-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>);
C3:
    #(<column-splitter-pane>, <column-splitter>, <splitter>, <single-child-wrapping-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <wrapping-layout-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>)


The class precedence list of <win32-viewport> differ, Dylan:
    #(<win32-viewport>, <viewport>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <win32-pane-mixin>, <standard-input-mixin>, <sheet-with-event-queue-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <scrolling-sheet-mixin>, <permanent-medium-mixin>, <sheet-with-medium-mixin>, <mirrored-sheet-mixin>, <sheet-with-resource-mixin>, <single-child-composite-pane>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-composite-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>);
C3:
    #(<win32-viewport>, <viewport>, <basic-gadget>, <gadget>, <abstract-gadget>, <win32-pane-mixin>, <standard-input-mixin>, <sheet-with-event-queue-mixin>, <client-overridability-mixin>, <scrolling-sheet-mixin>, <permanent-medium-mixin>, <mirrored-sheet-mixin>, <sheet-with-resource-mixin>, <sheet-with-medium-mixin>, <single-child-composite-pane>, <single-child-mixin>, <basic-composite-pane>, <cached-space-requirement-mixin>, <composite-layout-mixin>, <layout-mixin>, <layout>, <basic-sheet>, <sheet>, <abstract-sheet>, <event-handler>, <object>)


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation is available in the hannesm/c3 branch on
GitHub: `hannesm/c3 <https://github.com/hannesm/opendylan/tree/c3>`_

