documentation/getting-started-cli/source/platform-specific.rst, before:

Platform Specific Projects
==========================

.. index:: Platform Specific Projects

When a project involves platform-specific code, some consideration needs
to be made to the lid file and registry, as well as the layout of code.
As an example, consider the ``io`` and system libraries, found in
https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/master/sources/io/ and
https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/master/sources/system/.


Lid File
--------

For further details of the lid file format, see `Lid file`_.

.. _Lid file: http://opendylan.org/documentation/library-reference/lid.html

1) Library

   The library remains the same across all platforms since it is, after
   all, a platform-dependent version of that library:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         unix-io.lid               win32-io.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   Library:        io                        io
   =============== ========================= =========================


2) Files

   Each platform's project may contain files that are the same in each
   platform, as well as files which are present in one but not in another:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         unix-io.lid               win32-io.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   Files:          buffered-format           buffered-format
   ..              format-condition          format-condition
   ..              unix-interface            win32-interface
   ..              unix-file-accessor        win-file-accessor
   ..              unix-standard-io          win32-standard-io
   ..              format-out                format-out
   ..              *(etc)*                   *(etc)*
   C-Source-Files: unix-portability.c
   RC-Files:       ..                        version.rc
   =============== ========================= =========================


3) Linked Libraries (from dylan-lang/opendylan/sources/system)

   Each platform's project will probably require a different set of
   linked libraries:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         x86_64-linux-system.lid   x86-win32-system.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   C-Libraries:    -ldl                      advapi32.lib
   ..              ..                        shell32.lib
   =============== ========================= =========================


   .. note:: An example from the ``system`` library was used as the
      ``io`` library doesn't link directly against any C libraries.


Registry
--------

For further details of setting up the registry entries, see
:doc:`source-registries`.  

Normally, when a reference to a (platform independent) project is placed
in the registry, it is put into the generic directory. Platform dependent
projects are placed in the platform-labelled subdirectories. *e.g.*

opendylan/sources/registry/x86_64-linux/io
  ``abstract://dylan/io/unix-io.lid``

opendylan/sources/registry/x86-win32/io
  ``abstract://dylan/io/win32-io.lid``


Code Layout
-----------

The ``io`` library is laid out in the following manner:

1. All platform-specific code is inside a single module (``io-internals``).
2. ``*-interface.dylan`` contains the low-level functions accessing the
   platform-specific libraries (*e.g.* ``unix-read``, ``win32-read``).
3. ``*-file-accessor.dylan`` uses the functions from (2) to produce a
   platform-independent API (*e.g.* ``accessor-read-into!``).
4. Only those methods from (3) are exported from the module. 

.. note:: Most libraries that are portable aren't as complex in
   their layout as the ``io`` library and don't require separate
   modules.

Commit message:

[doc,getting-started] Add section on LID inheritance.

documentation/getting-started-cli/source/platform-specific.rst, after:

Platform Specific Projects
==========================

.. index:: Platform Specific Projects

When a project involves platform-specific code, some consideration needs
to be made to the lid file and registry, as well as the layout of code.
As an example, consider the ``io`` and system libraries, found in
https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/master/sources/io/ and
https://github.com/dylan-lang/opendylan/tree/master/sources/system/.


LID File
--------

For further details of the LID file format, see `LID file`_.

.. _LID file: http://opendylan.org/documentation/library-reference/lid.html

1) Library

   The library remains the same across all platforms since it is, after
   all, a platform-dependent version of that library:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         unix-io.lid               win32-io.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   Library:        io                        io
   =============== ========================= =========================


2) Files

   Each platform's project may contain files that are the same in each
   platform, as well as files which are present in one but not in another:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         unix-io.lid               win32-io.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   Files:          buffered-format           buffered-format
   ..              format-condition          format-condition
   ..              unix-interface            win32-interface
   ..              unix-file-accessor        win-file-accessor
   ..              unix-standard-io          win32-standard-io
   ..              format-out                format-out
   ..              *(etc)*                   *(etc)*
   C-Source-Files: unix-portability.c
   RC-Files:       ..                        version.rc
   =============== ========================= =========================

3) Linked Libraries (from dylan-lang/opendylan/sources/system)

   Each platform's project will probably require a different set of
   linked libraries:

   =============== ========================= =========================
   Keyword         x86_64-linux-system.lid   x86-win32-system.lid
   =============== ========================= =========================
   C-Libraries:    -ldl                      advapi32.lib
   ..              ..                        shell32.lib
   =============== ========================= =========================


   .. note:: An example from the ``system`` library was used as the
      ``io`` library doesn't link directly against any C libraries.


LID File Inheritance
--------------------

When LID files are almost identical, it can be useful to create
a base LID file and inherit it, overriding whatever is necessary
for each platform. A per-platform LID file might look like::

    Library:        uv
    LID:            uv-posix.lid
    C-libraries:    -framework CoreServices


Registry
--------

For further details of setting up the registry entries, see
:doc:`source-registries`.  

Normally, when a reference to a (platform independent) project is placed
in the registry, it is put into the generic directory. Platform dependent
projects are placed in the platform-labelled subdirectories. *e.g.*

opendylan/sources/registry/x86_64-linux/io
  ``abstract://dylan/io/unix-io.lid``

opendylan/sources/registry/x86-win32/io
  ``abstract://dylan/io/win32-io.lid``


Code Layout
-----------

The ``io`` library is laid out in the following manner:

1. All platform-specific code is inside a single module (``io-internals``).
2. ``*-interface.dylan`` contains the low-level functions accessing the
   platform-specific libraries (*e.g.* ``unix-read``, ``win32-read``).
3. ``*-file-accessor.dylan`` uses the functions from (2) to produce a
   platform-independent API (*e.g.* ``accessor-read-into!``).
4. Only those methods from (3) are exported from the module. 

.. note:: Most libraries that are portable aren't as complex in
   their layout as the ``io`` library and don't require separate
   modules.
